           Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 1 of 6



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

     UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                         )
                                                      )
                           v.                         )    NO. 18-CR-10064-LTS
                                                      )
     RYAN HOLLERAN                                    )
                                                      )

                      DEFENDANT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

         The Defendant, Ryan Holleran, entered a plea of guilty as to Count 1 of the Indictment

inasmuch as it charged Possession with Intent to Distribute Oxycodone in violation of 21 U.S.C.

§ 841. The Indictment’s remaining counts were thereafter dismissed on motion of the

government in view of the Court’s order partially allowing Holleran’s motion to suppress. For

the reasons that follow, Holleran argues that the Court’s suppression order should also preclude

the use of suppressed evidence at his sentencing. Accordingly, he maintains that the proper

application of the Sentencing Guidelines yields an advisory range of 18-24 months. Having

already served approximately 20 months in pretrial detention, Ryan Holleran requests that the

Court impose a sentence of time served and place him on supervised release for a period of 3

years.

                      USE OF SUPPRESSED EVIDENCE AT SENTENCING

         The main issue presented at this sentencing concerns the scope of the Court’s suppression

order. The presentence report recommended that Holleran be accountable for the drugs and guns

seized from the basement of 116 North Street, all of which were suppressed. PSR ¶25. In so

doing, the Probation Office cited to USSG §6A1.3(a), which provides that the Court “may

consider relevant information without regard to its admissibility under the rules of evidence

applicable at trial.” If the Court accepts this proposition, due to additional drug quantities and


                                                  1
           Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 2 of 6



firearms found in the basement, the sentencing range suggested by the Sentencing Guidelines is

46-57 months. Conversely, if the Court declines to consider the suppress evidence, the

sentencing range is considerably lower: 18-24 months.1

         Holleran contends that (a) the exclusionary rule bars the use of suppressed evidence

where, as here, police intentionally act in violation of the Fourth Amendment in order to increase

a defendant’s sentence, and (b) as a matter of judicial discretion, the Court should decline to

consider the suppressed evidence for sentencing purposes in order to uphold the deterrent force

of the Court’s suppression order.

    I.      Although the general rule is that suppressed evidence may be considered at
            sentencing, it remains an open question in this Circuit “whether the exclusionary
            rule would bar the use of [suppressed] evidence when police intentionally act in
            violation of the Fourth Amendment in order to increase a defendant’s sentence.”

    The defendant acknowledges that, as a general matter, there is “no blanket prohibition on the

consideration of illegally seized evidence for the purposes of making the findings required under

the Guidelines.” United States v. Acosta, 303 F.3d 78, 84 (1st Cir. 2002) (internal citation

omitted). However, the Acosta court pointedly left open “the question of whether the

exclusionary rule would bar the use of evidence when police intentionally act in violation of the

Fourth Amendment in order to increase a defendant's sentence.” Id. at 87.

    Holleran asserts that the Fourth Amendment violation in his case implicates the question left

open by Acosta. Here, the police executed a search warrant and seized two plastic bags

containing oxycodone pills from Holleran’s apartment at 116 North Street and placed him under

arrest. Notwithstanding that the search warrant did not authorize it, and surely knowing that any

evidence obtained would be used to Holleran’s detriment at sentencing, the officers nonetheless



1
 The oxycodone tablet seized from Mr. Holleran’s apartment produce a Converted Drug Weight of 59.9kg and yield
an Offense Level of 18. Adjusted for acceptance of responsibility, the resulting Total Offense Level is 15.

                                                      2
            Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 3 of 6



extended their search into the basement. In suppressing evidence from the basement search, the

Court found that the actions of the police were not merely a violation of the Fourth Amendment

but so unreasonable as to fall outside the good faith exception. The Court’s suppression order

spoke specifically to the unreasonableness of the officers’ conduct and the need for deterrence:

          “These characteristics of the basement at 116 North Street differ from previously decided
          First Circuit cases “in way that a reasonable person would suspect might be legally
          significant.” Bain, 874 F.3d at 20. A reasonable officer would have thought these
          differences legally significant, which indeed they are. “[W]here judicial precedent does
          not clearly authorize a particular practice, suppression has deterrent value because it
          creates an ‘incentive to err on the side of constitutional behavior,’” and the good faith
          exception is unavailable. Sparks, 711 F.3d at 63 (quoting United States v. Davis, 598
          F.3d 1259, 1265-66 (11th Cir. 2010), aff’d, 564 U.S. 229 (2011)).”

Order on Motion to Suppress at 16. Under the circumstances of this case, at least, the

exclusionary rule precludes the Court from relying on the fruits of an unlawful search to increase

Holleran’s sentence.


    II.      As an exercise of discretion, the Court should decline to consider the fruits of an
             unlawful search so as not to dilute the deterrent purpose of its suppression
             order.

    Even assuming arguendo that the Court is not prepared to find that the police acted

intentionally for the purpose of increasing Holleran’s sentence, the Court nonetheless should

disclaim any reliance on the basement evidence.2 USSG §6A1.3(a) provides only that the Court

“may” consider relevant information without regard to its admissibility under the rules of

evidence applicable at trial. The Court enjoys wide latitude in deciding what information on

which to rely at sentencing and how such evidence is to be weighed.




2
 As Judge Easterbrook has opined, “[i]t is inconceivable that any defendant will be able to show that the police had
only one of these purposes in mind when making a seizure.” United States v. Jewel, 947 F.2d 224, 238 (7th
Cir.1991) (Easterbrook, J., concurring). He went on: “It is awfully hard to see why motive should matter on either
prudential or doctrinal grounds. Is the seizure less offensive to the Constitution, or is deterrence less important,
when the police drain their minds of the possibility that the seizure will contribute to a conviction?” Id.

                                                         3
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 4 of 6



   There is no requirement that the Court rely on the fruits of an unlawful search, particularly

where doing so would frustrate the deterrent function of its own suppression order. This Court

can and should exclude the basement evidence from its sentencing calculus so as to ensure that

the deterrent value in its suppression order remains intact. Judge Wolf has seen fit to do so on

occasion, finding that “in this case at least, the suppression of the firearm for the purposes of

computing the applicable Sentencing Guidelines is also necessary and appropriate to effectuate

the purposes of the exclusionary rule.” United States v. Rullo, 748 F. Supp. 36, 45 fn. 6 (D.

Mass. 1990). To hold otherwise would detract from the force of the Court’s suppression order,

weaken Fourth Amendment protections, and encourage unconstitutional behavior. See Verdugo

v. United States, 402 F.2d 599 (9th Cir. 1968) (reasoning that where some evidence has been

seized lawfully, police subsequently have nothing “nothing to lose by risking an unlawful

search” unless suppressed evidence is excluded at sentencing); see also Victor Jay Miller, An

End Run Around the Exclusionary Rule: The Use of Illegally Seized Evidence Under the Federal

Sentencing Guidelines, 34 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 241 (1992) (advocating for application of

exclusionary rule to sentencing proceedings); Clinton R. Pinyan, Illegally Seized Evidence at

Sentencing: How to Satisfy the Constitution and the Guidelines with an "Evidentiary" Limitation,

University of Chicago Legal Forum: Vol. 1994, Article 22 (1994) (advocating exclusion at

sentencing of evidence illegally seized after officers have sufficient physical evidence to secure a

conviction for a related offense).

                              SENTENCING RECOMMENDATION

       For the reasons outlined above, Holleran submits that the Court should find his Total

Offense Level under the Guidelines to be 15 after accounting for acceptance of responsibility.

Because his criminal history category is I, the resulting advisory sentencing range is 18-24



                                                  4
            Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 5 of 6



months. He respectfully requests that the Court imposed a time-served sentence, as he has

served approximately 20 months in pretrial detention, to be followed by three years of supervised

release.

        Whatever the Court’s application of the Guidelines and the resulting advisory sentencing

range, Holleran submits that a careful weighing of the sentencing factors under 18 USC §

3553(a) leads to the conclusion that a sentence of time served with 3 years of supervised release

will be "sufficient, but not greater than necessary" to achieve the goals of

sentencing. While his involvement in drugs is undoubtedly alarming, Holleran’s background and

personal characteristics suggest there is reason for optimism. He is 28 years old and this matter

is his first criminal conviction of any sort. Although major substance abuse by his parents

caused significant turmoilin his childhood, his substance usage has largely been limited to

marijuana. He maintains healthy and supportive relationships with other family members and

will have their support upon release. With the assistance of the Probation Office, he intends to

seek legitimate employment and work toward reunification with his children. As Lucy Pinto’s

testimony at the motion to suppress hearing illustrated, Holleran has a number of redeeming

qualities and the capacity to be a productive, upstanding member of the community.3


                                                  Respectfully submitted,

                                                  RYAN HOLLERAN,
                                                  By His Attorneys,




3
  Originally her tenant, Holleran came to be “like a son” to Ms. Pinto. She noted that Holleran was always a good
tenant who treated her with kindness, often helping her with tasks around the house.

                                                         5
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 91 Filed 07/22/19 Page 6 of 6



                                            /s/ Scott Lauer____
                                            Scott Lauer
                                            B.B.O. # 667807
                                            Samia Hossain
                                            B.B.O. # 696329

                                            Federal Public Defender Office
                                            51 Sleeper Street, 5th Floor
                                            Boston, MA 02210
                                            (617) 223-8061
                                            scott_lauer@fd.org
                                            samia_hossain@fd.org


                                 CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I, Scott Lauer, hereby certify that this document filed through the ECF system will be sent
electronically to the registered participant(s) as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing (NEF)
on July 22, 2019.

                                               /s/ Scott Lauer
                                               Scott Lauer




                                                  6
