            Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 1 of 8



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                     )
                                             )
       v.                                    )   Criminal No. 18-10064-LTS
                                             )
RYAN HOLLERAN,                               )
                                             )
                      Defendant.             )


                    GOVERNMENT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

       For the reasons stated herein, the United States respectfully requests that the Court

sentence the defendant to 46 months in prison followed by three years of supervised release,

forfeiture of the drugs and firearms, and a $100 mandatory special assessment.

                                             FACTS

       Police obtained a search warrant for Holleran’s person and his apartment, Unit 2 of 116

North Street in New Bedford, a triple-decker residence, based on evidence that Holleran was

selling cocaine out of the apartment.

       When they executed the warrant, police seized 199 tabs of oxycodone 30 mg, baggies,

cutting agent, an iPhone, and a key to a padlock, all from Holleran’s person or his apartment.

Then they went to the basement of the apartment building. There were two locks on the

basement door – a slide lock and a padlock – but both were unlocked. The key found in

Holleran’s apartment fit the padlock. Police entered the basement, which they believed was a

common area in which tenants, including Holleran, lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.

Officers found another 99 tabs of oxycodone 30 mg, a substance or mixture weighing 128.19

grams containing cocaine, a substance or mixture weighing 46 grams containing cocaine base,

four firearms (a loaded Remington sawed-off shotgun, a Stag Arms semi-automatic rifle with an
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 2 of 8



obliterated serial number, a loaded revolver, and a Cobray semi-automatic pistol), 736 rounds of

ammunition, and 14 firearm magazines.

       Holleran’s landlady, who lived in the first floor unit, and the third-floor tenants

disclaimed ownership of the drugs, guns, and ammunition. The landlady told police that Holleran

stored his items in the corner of the basement where police found the evidence.

       When police searched Holleran’s iPhone pursuant to a search warrant, they found many

incriminating photos and videos of drugs and guns, including the Remington shotgun, the Stag

Arms rifle, the Cobray pistol, and a revolver. Several of the videos recorded Holleran’s face

and/or voice.

       A grand jury returned a four-count indictment against Holleran, charging him with

Possession with Intent to Distribute Cocaine, Oxycodone, and 28 Grams of More of Cocaine

Base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(B)(iii) (Count One); Possession of an

Unregistered Firearm (the sawed-off shotgun), in violation of 26 U.S.C. § 5861(d) (Count Two);

Possession of a Firearm with an Obliterated Serial Number, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(k)

(Count Three); and Possession of a Firearm in Furtherance of a Drug Trafficking Crime, in

violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1) (Count Four).

       Holleran moved to suppress the evidence seized from the basement. The Court allowed

the motion. Doc. No. 64. The Court first rejected the government’s argument that Holleran

lacked an objectively reasonable expectation of privacy in the basement. Id. at 12-15. In doing

so, the Court described this as a “‘close case, the resolution of which is heavily dependent on

particular facts.’” Id. at 14 (quoting United States v. Rheault, 561 F.3d 55, 61 (1st Cir. 2009)).

The Court’s decision turned in part on facts that were unknown to police at the time of the

search. For example, the Court credited the landlady’s testimony at the evidentiary hearing that



                                                  2
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 3 of 8



only she and Holleran had access to the basement; that she usually kept the basement locked; and

that she shared an unusually close relationship with Holleran, whom she described as “like a

son.” Id. at 14-15. Next, the Court denied the government’s request for application of the Davis

good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule. Id. at 15-16. The Court rejected the government’s

argument that the basement was a “common area” in which all tenants of 116 North Street lacked

an objectively reasonable expectation of privacy, pursuant to binding First Circuit precedent. Id.

Finally, the Court rejected the government’s request that the evidence be deemed admissible

under the inevitable discovery doctrine, concluding that applying the doctrine in this case would

weaken the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement. Id. at 17-20.

       Nowhere in its opinion did the Court find that the officers had intentionally violated

Holleran’s Fourth Amendment rights or acted in bad faith. Rather, the Court held that, “when

presented with a novel factual scenario which [did] not fit within well-settled appellate precedent

authorizing a warrantless search,” the officers should have sought a warrant for the basement

instead of assuming that it was a common area. Id. at 19.

       The Court’s suppression of the basement evidence left the government no choice but to

dismiss the counts based on that evidence, that is, Counts Two-Four and so much of Count One

as charged drugs seized from the basement. Holleran pled guilty to so much of Count One as

charged drugs seized from his person or the apartment: 199 tabs of oxycodone 30 mg.

                             CRIMINAL HISTORY CATEGORY

       This is the third case in which Holleran has benefited from a favorable ruling on a

suppression motion.

       In 2010 Holleran was charged in New Bedford District Court with Possession with Intent

to Distribute Class D when officers seized more than two pounds of marijuana from his home.



                                                 3
            Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 4 of 8



The charge was dismissed, however, after Holleran won a motion to suppress the evidence,

apparently based on an argument that he did not give police permission to search his home. See

PSR ¶ 44.

       In 2015 Holleran was charged in Fall River District Court with numerous offenses,

including firearms offenses and Possession with Intent to Distribute Class B (oxycodone). The

charges were dismissed, however, after Holleran won a motion to suppress the evidence. That

evidence included a loaded handgun which Holleran dropped outside his vehicle during a traffic

stop, claiming it was his phone. See PSR ¶ 45.

       Holleran has no criminal history points and falls in CHC I.

                                     USSG CALCULATION

       Probation has correctly determined that relevant conduct includes the evidence seized

from the basement, notwithstanding its suppression as trial evidence. See United States v. Acosta,

303 F.3d 78, 86 (1st Cir. 2002) (“the exclusionary rule does not bar the use of evidence seized in

violation of a defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights in sentencing”); USSG § 6A1.3(a) (“the

court may consider relevant information without regard to its admissibility under the rules of

evidence applicable at trial, provided that the information has sufficient indicia of reliability to

support its probable accuracy”).

       The Acosta court “[left] open the question of whether the exclusionary rule would bar the

use of evidence when police intentionally act in violation of the Fourth Amendment in order to

increase a defendant’s sentence.” 303 F.3d at 86. Holleran argues that, when police seized

evidence from the basement of Holleran’s apartment building, they intentionally violated his

Fourth Amendment rights in order to increase his sentence. Def. Sentencing Memo. at 2. This

argument should be rejected because the Court did not find that officers intentionally violated



                                                  4
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 5 of 8



Holleran’s Fourth Amendment rights. On the contrary, the Court described the factual scenario

encountered by the officers as “novel” and characterized the suppression issue as a “close case.”

Doc. No. 64 at 14, 18. The harshest criticism offered by the Court was that the officers had

“simply operated on the assumption that all basements [of apartment buildings] are unprotected

common spaces” instead of making a more fact-specific assessment. Id. at 17. Finding that a

police officer made an assumption that turned out to be unsupported by the facts is a far cry from

finding that the officer intentionally violated the defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights.

Carelessness is poles apart from a calculated effort.

       The Court also should reject Holleran’s contention that the Court’s rejection of the Davis

good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule somehow was equivalent to a finding that the

officers acted in bad faith. See Def. Sentencing Memo. at 3. The two are not the same. For Davis

to apply, the Court would have had to have found that the police acted “in objectively reasonable

reliance on binding appellate precedent.” Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229, 232 (2011). In

arguing Davis here, the government cited cases like United States v. Garner, 338 F.3d 78, 80 (1st

Cir. 2003) (holding that defendant had no privacy interest in basement of apartment building

“since it was a common area”); United States v. Hawkins, 139 F.3d 29, 32 (1st Cir. 1998) (“it is

beyond cavil in this circuit that a tenant lacks a reasonable expectation of privacy in the common

areas of an apartment building”); and United States v. Cruz Pagán, 537 F.2d 554, 557-58 (1st

Cir. 1976) (“one does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy with regard to objects left in a

common garage or basement of a multi-unit apartment house”). The Court acknowledged this

precedent but said enough facts distinguished the basement of Holleran’s apartment building

from the areas found to be “common areas” in Garner, Hawkins, Cruz Pagan, and the like.

       Finally, the Court should reject Holleran’s argument urging the Court to exclude the



                                                 5
            Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 6 of 8



suppressed evidence from the Guidelines calculation. See Def. Sentencing Memo. at 3-4. There

is no reason to do so. As noted above, the Court held the suppression issue to be a “close case.”

It did not find that officers intentionally violated Holleran’s Fourth Amendment rights. It held

that officers simply made assumptions based on their understanding of First Circuit precedent

that turned out to be incorrect. (To be fair, officers are not usually lawyers who pore over details

and nuances of appellate opinions.) Judge Wolf’s decision not to consider a suppressed firearm

at sentencing in a case decided twelve years before the First Circuit decided Acosta ought not to

control the Court’s decision-making here. See Def. Sentencing Memo. at 4 (citing United States

v. Rullo, 748 F. Supp. 36, 45 n.6 (D. Mass. 1990)). Indeed, the First Circuit implied in a fairly

recent decision that a district court should if not must consider suppressed evidence in making

the Guidelines calculation at sentencing. See United States v. Vazquez, 724 F.3d 15, 28 n.10 (1st

Cir. 2013) (“Even if the district court determines on remand that Vázquez’s consent to the search

of her home was invalid and so suppresses the evidence obtained therein, that decision will not

impact the facts considered by the district court in calculating Vázquez’s sentence.”) (emphasis

added).

                       A SENTENCE OF 46 MONTHS IS REASONABLE

          Probation has correctly determined that consideration of the drugs and guns seized from

the basement yields an adjusted offense level of 26, minus 3 levels for acceptance of

responsibility. See PSR ¶¶ 24-36. The Guidelines range for offense level 23, CHC I, is 46-57

months. Id. ¶ 78. The government recommends the low end of this range: 46 months.

          It is the government’s position that this case would not have been difficult to prove

beyond a reasonable doubt had Holleran lost his suppression motion. If convicted, Holleran

would have faced a mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years: five years for possession of 28+



                                                   6
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 7 of 8



grams of cocaine base with intent to distribute, plus ten years on and after for possession of a

sawed-off shotgun in furtherance of a drug-trafficking crime. See 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B)(iii);

18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(B)(i).

       The 46 months of imprisonment recommended by the government is neither

unreasonable nor unduly harsh, particularly when one considers the 15-year mandatory minimum

sentence that Holleran narrowly avoided in this case, as well as the benefit that his criminal

history score gained from favorable suppression rulings in two previous cases. Including the

basement evidence as part of relevant conduct also is fair in that Holleran was clearly the person

who possessed those drugs and guns. This is not a case where the court suppressed evidence that

may have belonged to someone other than the defendant.

                                         CONCLUSION

       For these reasons, the United States respectfully requests that the Court sentence Holleran

to 46 months in prison followed by three years of supervised release, forfeiture of the drugs and

firearms, and a $100 mandatory special assessment.

                                              Respectfully submitted,

                                              ANDREW E. LELLING
                                              United States Attorney

                                              By: /s/ Christine J. Wichers
                                              CHRISTINE J. WICHERS
                                              Assistant U.S. Attorney
                                               (617) 748-3278
                                              christine.wichers@usdoj.gov




                                                 7
          Case 1:18-cr-10064-LTS Document 92 Filed 07/22/19 Page 8 of 8



                                      Certificate of Service

        I certify that, on July 22, 2019, this document filed through the ECF system was sent
electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing (NEF).

                                              /s/ Christine J. Wichers
                                              Christine J. Wichers




                                                 8
