AO 245B (Rev. 11716) Judgment in a Criminal Case
                       Sheet 1




                                             United States District Court
                                                        District of Massachusetts
              UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                           JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE
                                    V.


                         MONDALE BROWN                                           Case Number: 1: 18 CR 10244                   -   1     -   IT
                                                                                 USM Number: 01113-138

                                                                                  Jane F. Peachy
                                                                                 Defendant's Attorney
THE DEFENDANT:

 0 pleaded guilty to count(s)            1

• pleaded nolo contendere to count(s)
   which was accepted by the court.
• was found guilty on count{s)
   after a plea of not guilty.

The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these offenses:

Title & Section                    Nature of Offense                                                      Offense Ended                Count
18 U.S.C.§ 922(g)(1)             Felon in Possession of Firearms and Ammunition                              06/28/18




       The defendantis sentenced as provided in pages 2 through                         of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant to
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.
• The defendant hasbeen found not guiltyon count(s)
• Count(s)                                              •   is   • are dismissed on the motion ofthe United States.
        Itisordered that the defendant must notify the United States attorney for this district within 30 days of any change ofname, residence,
ormailing address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments imposed bythis judgment are fiilly paid. Ifordered topay restitution,
the defendant must notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in economic circumstances.
                                                                         8/27/2019
                                                                        Date of Imposition of Judgment



                                                                           nature bfJudge

                                                                                 The Honorable Indira Talwani
                                                                                 U.S. District Judge
                                                                        Name and Title of Judge



                                                                        Date
                                                                                             1 ho 1"^
AO 245B (Rev. 11/16) Judgment in Criminal Case
                     Sheet2 — Imprisonment
                                                                                                       Judgment — Page      of
 DEFENDANT: MONDALE BROWN
 CASE NUMBER:             1: 18 CR 10244             - 1      -IT

                                                              IMPRISONMENT

         The defendant is hereby committed to thecustody of theFederal Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned fora total
 term of:          27   month(s)




     0   The courtmakes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:

  The Court recommends that Defendant participate in BOP's 500-Hour Residential Drug Abuse Program (RDAP) due to his
  substance abuse history and based on an informal pre-screening performed bythe Probation Office.
  The Courtfurther recommends that Defendant complete his GED.

    •    Thedefendant is remanded to thecustody of the United States Marshal.

    •    The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district:

         •    at                                 •     a.m.     •   p.m.     on
         •    as notified by the United States Marshal.

    •    The defendant shall surrender forservice of sentence at theinstitution designated bytheBureau of Prisons:
         •    before2 p.m. on
         •    as notified by the United States Marshal.
         •    as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.



                                                                    RETURN

I have executed this judgment as follows:




         Defendant delivered on                                                           to


                                                     , with a certified copy of this judgment.



                                                                                                    UNITED STATES MARSHAL



                                                                           By
                                                                                                 DEPUTY UNITED STATES MARSHAL
AO 24SB(Rev. 11/16) Judgmentin a Criminal Case
                       Sheet3 — Supervised Release
                                                                                                       Judgment—^Page   3    of
DEFENDANT:            MONDALE BROWN
CASE NUMBER:             1: 18 CR 10244              - 1     - IT
                                                           SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release from imprisonment, you will be on supervised release for aterm of:                          3 year(s)
 The court recommends that Defendant participate in the Probation Office's CARE Program or similar program ifDefendant's
 supervision is transferred to a different jurisdiction.




                                                     MANDATORY CONDITIONS

1.      You must not commit another federal, state or local crime.
2.      You must not unlawfullypossess a controlled substance.
3.      You must refrain from any unlawful use ofa controlled substance. You must submit to one drug test within 15 days ofrelease from
        imprisonment andat least twoperiodic drugteststhereafter, as determined by thecourt.
               • Theabove drugtesting condition is suspended, basedon the court's determination that you
                  pose a low risk of future substance abuse, (check ifapplicable)
4.       0 Youmust cooperate in thecollection of DNA as directed bythe probation officer, (check ifapplicable)
5.       • You must comply with the requirements ofthe Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (42 U.S.C. §16901, etseq.) as
            directed bythe probation officer, the Bureau ofPrisons, orany state sex offender registration agency inthe location where you
           reside,work, are a student,or were convictedof a qualifying offense, (check ifapplicable)
6.       • Youmustparticipate in an approved program for domestic violence, (check ifapplicable)


You must comply with thestandard conditions that have been adopted bythis court as well as with anyother conditions onthe attached
page.
AO 245B (Rev. 11/16)    Judgment in a Criminal Case
                       Sheet3A — Supervised Release
                                                                                               Judgment—Page                 of
DEFENDANT:             MONDALE BROWN
CASE NUMBER:                1: 18 CR 10244            - 1   - IT


                                        STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION
As part ofyour supervised release, you must comply with the following standard conditions ofsupervision. These conditions are imposed
because they establish the basic expectations for your behavior while onsupervision and identify the minimum tools needed byprobation
officers to keep informed, report to thecourt about, andbring about improvements inyour conduct andcondition.
1.    You must report to the probation office inthe federal judicial district where you are authorized toreside within 72 hours ofyour
      release from imprisonment, unless the probation officer instructs you to report to a different probation office or within a different time
      frame.
2. After initially reporting to the probation office, you will receive instructions from the court orthe probation officer about how and
   when you must report to theprobation officer, andyoumust report to theprobation officer as instructed.
3. You must not knowingly leave the federal Judicial district where you are authorized to reside without first getting permission from the
      court or the probation officer.
4.    Youmust answer truthfully the questions asked by yourprobation officer.
5. You must live ata place approved bythe probation officer. Ifyou plan tochange where you live oranything about your living
   arrangements (such asthe people you live with), you must notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If notifying
   the probation officer in advance is not possible due to unanticipated circumstances, you must notify the probation officer within 72
      hours of becoming aware of a change or expected change.
6. You must allow the probation officer tovisit you atany time atyour home orelsewhere, and you must permit the probation officer to
   take any items prohibited bytheconditions of your supervision that heor she observes inplain view.
7. You must work full time (at least 30hours per week) ata lawful type ofemployment, unless the probation officer excuses you from
   doing so. Ifyou do not have full-time employment you must try tofind full-time employment, unless the probation officer excuses
   you from doing so. Ifyou plan to change where you work or anything about your work (such asyour position oryour job
   responsibilities), you must notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If notifying the probation officer at least 10
      days in advance is notpossible dueto unanticipated circumstances, you must notify theprobation officer within 72 hours of
      becoming awareof a changeor expected change.
8.    You must not communicate orinteract with someone you know isengaged incriminal activity. Ifyou know someone has been
      convicted ofa felony, you must not knowingly communicate orinteract with that person without first getting the permission ofthe
      probation officer.
9.    If you are arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer, you must notify theprobation officer within 72 hours.
10.   You must not own, possess, orhave access toa firearm, ammunition, destructive device, ordangerous weapon (i.e., anything that was
      designed, orwas modified for, the specific purpose ofcausing bodily injury ordeath toanother person such asnunchakus ortasers).
11.   Youmustnot act or make anyagreement witha lawenforcement agency to act as a confidential human source or informant without
      first getting the permission of the court.
12.   Ifthe probation officer determines that you pose a risk to another person (including an organization), the probation officer may
      require you tonotify the person about the risk and you must comply with that instruction. The probation officer may contact the
      personand confirm that you have notifiedthe person about the risk.
13.   You must follow theinstructions of theprobation officer related to theconditions ofsupervision.



U.S. Probation Office Use Only
AU.S. probation officer has instructed me on the conditions specified by the court and has provided me with a written copy ofthis
judgment containing these conditions. For further information regarding these conditions, see Overview ofProbation and Supervised
Release Conditions, available at: www.uscourts.gov.


Defendant's Signature                                                                                    Date
AO 245B(Rcv. 11/16)   Judgment in a Criminal Case
                      Sheet3D — Supervised Release

DEFENDANT: MONDALE BROWN
CASE NUMBER: 1-                       10244          - 1   -IT

                                       SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

   1. You must participate in a program for substance abuse counseling as directed bythe Probation Office, which program
   may include testing, notto exceed 104 drug tests peryear to determine whether you have reverted to the use ofdrugs.
   2. You must participate in a mental health treatment program as directed by the Probation Office.
   3. You mustparticipate in an educational services program, as directed bythe Probation Office. Such program may
   include GED preparation, and/or otherclasses designed to improve your proficiency in skills such as reading, writing,
   mathematics, and computer use.
   4. You shall be required to contribute to the costs of evaluation, treatment, programming, and/or monitoring based on the
   ability to pay or availability of third-party payment.
AO 245B (Rev. 11/16)   Judgment in a Cnminal Case
                       Sheet5 — CriminalMonetaryPenalties
                                                                                                            Judgment — Page
 DEFENDANT: MONDALE BROWN
CASE NUMBER;               1= 18 CR 10244               - 1         - IT
                                                CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

       The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under theschedule of payments on Sheet 6.

                       Assessment                   JVTA Assessment*                    Fine                      Restitution
TOTALS              $ 100.00                    $                                   $



•      The determination of restitution is deferred until                      . An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case(A0245C) will be entered
       after such determination.


•      The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed below.

       If the defendant makes a partial payment, each payee shall receive an approximatelyproportioned payment, unless specified otherwise in
       the^priority^ order o^r percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(i), all nonfederal victims must bepaid
       before the United States is paid.

Name of Payee                                                            Total Loss**              Restitution Ordered          Priority or Percentage




 TOTALS                                                                                     0.00    $




•       Restitution amount orderedpursuant to plea agreement $

•       The defendant must pay interest onrestitution and a fine ofmore than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
        fifteenth day after thedate of the judgment, pursuant to IS U.S.C. § 3612(f). All of the payment options onSheet 6 maybe subject
        to penalties for delinquencyand default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

•       Thecourtdetermined that the defendant does not have theabilityto pay interest and it is ordered that:
        •    the interest requirement is waived for the         •       fine   •   restitution.

        •    the interest requirement for the       •    fine       •     restitution is modified as follows:

 ♦   Justice for Victims ofTrafficking Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-22.
**Findings for the total amount oflosses are required underChapters 109A, 110,1lOA, and 113Aof Title 18for offenses committed on or
after September 13, 1994, but before April 23,1996.
AO 245B (Rev. 11/16)   Judgmentin a Criminal Case
                       Sheet 6 — Schedule of Payments
                                                                                                              Judgment — Page             of
 DEFENDANT:            MONDALE BROWN
CASE NUMBER:                1: 18 CR 10244              - 1     - IT


                                                        SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant's ability topay, payment ofthe total criminal monetary penalties is due asfollows:
A     0    Lump sum payment of $           100.00               due immediately, balance due

           •     not later than                                     ,or
           •      in accordance with •        C,    •    D,    •     E, or     •   F below; or

B     •    Payment to begin immediately (may becombined with                 DC,         • D, or      • F below); or

C     •    Payment in equal                         (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $                            over a period of
                           (e.g., months oryears), to commence                        (e.g., 30 or 60 days)after the date of this judgment; or

D     •    Payment in equal                         (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $                       over a period of
                           (e.g., months or years), to commence                     (e.g., 30 or 60days)after release fi*om imprisonment to a
           term of supervision; or

E     •    Payment during the term of supervised release will commence within                              (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from
           imprisonment. Thecourt will setthepayment plan based onan assessment ofthedefendant's ability to pay at that time; or
F     •    Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penalties:




Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise, ifthis judgment imposes imprisonment, payment ofcriminal monetary penalties isdue during
the period of imprisqmnent. All criminal monetary penalties, except those payments made through the Federal Bureau of Prisons' Inmate
Financial Responsibility Program, are made to the clerk of the court.

Thedefendant shall receive credit forallpayments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.



•     Joint and Several

      Defendant andCo-Defendant Names and CaseNumbers (including defendant number). TotalAmount, Jointand Several Amount,
      and corresponding payee, if appropriate.




•     The defendant shallpay the cost of prosecution.

•     The defendant shallpay the following court cost(s):

•     Thedefendant shall forfeit the defendant's interest in the following property to the United States:


Payments shall beapplied inthe following order: (1) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3) restitution interest, (4) fine principal, (5) fme
interest, (6) community restitution, (7) JVTA assessment, (8)penalties, and (9) costs, including cost ofprosecution and court costs.
