AO 245B (Rev, OBA GAIA gC areR YT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page lof6 PagelD #: 88

Sheet 1

United States District Court}; {61 65-8"

 

District of Maine RECEIVED AND FILED
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A CREMINALICASE: 25
V.
MICHAEL MURPHY Case Number: 2:13-cr-115-O0IGEPUTY CLERK

USM Number: 07851-036

David R. Beneman, Esq.
Defendant's Attorney

 

THE DEFENDANT:

pleaded guilty to count(s) one, two, and three of the Superseding Information.
[_] pleaded nolo contendere to count(s) which was accepted by the court.
[4 was found guilty on count(s) after a plea of not guilty.

The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these offenses:

Title & Section Nature of Offense Offense Ended Count
21 ULS.C. $§ 841(a)C1). Conspiracy to June 13. 2013 One
841(b)(1)(C) and 846 Distribute/Possess with

Intent to Distribute

Oxycodone
18 U.S.C. §§ 922(a)(1) and Felon in Possession of a June 13, 2013 Two
924(a}(2) Firearm
18 U.S.C. §§ 922(0) and Possession of a Machine June 13, 2013 Three
924(a)(2) Gun

The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 6 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

(-] The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s)
(-] Count(s) —s ([) is] are dismissed on the motion of the United States.

It is ordered that the defendant must notify the United States attorney for this district within 30 days of any change of name,

residence. or mailing address until all fines, restitution. costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. If

ordered to pay restitution, the defendant shall notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in economic
circumstances.

June 4, 2014

 

Date of Imposition of Judgment

Vitti, fOt td —_$_~

 

Signature &f Judge

Nancy Torresen, U.S. District Judge

 

Name and Title of Judge

Uyf20/Y

 

Date Signed
Case 2:13-cr-00115-NT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page 2of6 PagelD #: 89

AQ 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgment ina Criminal Case

Sheet 2 = Imprisonment
Judgment—Page 3 of 6

DEFENDANT: MICHAEL MURPHY
CASE NUMBER: 2:13-cer-115-001

IMPRISONMENT

The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a

total term of £20 months on Count One. Two and Three, to be served concurrently.

&] The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:

Placed in a facility that can address his medical situation.

The defendant be placed in the 500 hour RDAP program.

&

The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.

The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district:
im at Oam. Op.m. on .
oO as notified by the United States Marshal.

The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons.
Oo before 2 p.m. on

D as notified by the United States Marshal.
oO as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.
RETURN

I have executed this judgment as follows:

 

 

 

at

Defendant delivered on to
. witha certified copy of this judgment.

 

UNITED STATES MARSHAL

 

DEPUTY UNITED STATES MARSHAL
Case 2:13-cr-00115-NT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page 3of6 PagelD #: 90

AO SB (Rev. 09-08) Judgment ina Criminal Case
Sheet 3 = Supervised Release

DEFENDANT: MICHAEL MURPHY
CASE NUMBER: 2:13-cr-115-001

Judgment—Page 3 of 6

SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release from imprisonment. the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of 3 years on each of Counts One. Two
and Three, to be served concurrently.

The Defendant must report to the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release
from the custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal. state. or local crime.

The defendant shall not unlawfully possess a controlled substance. The defendant shall refrain from any unlawful use of a
controlled substance. The defendant shall submit to one drug test within 15 days of release from imprisonment and at least two
additional drug tests during the term of supervision. but not more than 120 drug tests per year thereafter, as directed by the
probation officer.

[_] The above drug testing condition is suspended. based on the court's determination that the defendant poses a tow risk of
future substance abuse. (Check. if applicable.)

Ed The defendant shall not possess a firearm, ammunition, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon. (Check, if
applicable.)
Ex] The defendant shall cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

LJ The defendant shall comply with the requirements of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (42 U.S.C. § 16901.
ef seq.) a8 directed by the probation officer. the Bureau of Prisons, or any state sex offender registration agency in which he or
she resides, works, is a student, or was convicted of a qualifying offense (Check, if applicable.)

{} The defendant shall participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (Check, if applicable.)

If this judgment imposes a fine or restitution, it is a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay in accordance with the
Schedule of Payments of this judgment.

Phe defendant must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court as well as any additional
conditions on the attached paze.

STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION
1) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district without the permission of the court or probation officer:
2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer in a manner and frequency directed by the court er probation officer:
3) the defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the instructions of the probation officer:
4) the defendant shalt support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities:
5) the defendant shall work regularly ata lawdul occupation. untess excused by the probation officer for schooling, training. or other acceptable reasons;
6) the defendant shall notils the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employment:

7) the defendant shail refrain trom excessive use of alcohol and shall not purchase. possess. use. distribute or administer any controlled substance or any
paraphernalia related to any controlled substances. except as prescribed by a physician. This provision does not permit the use of marijuana even with a
prescription, without further permission of the Court or probation officer.

8) — the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used. distributed, or administered:

9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activity, and shall not associate with any person canvicted of a felony. unless
granted permission to do so by the probation officer:

10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shail permit confiscation of any contraband
observed in plain view of the probation officer:

11) the defendant shall notitS the probation officer within seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer:

12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement lo act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency without the permission of the
court: and

13) as directed by the probation officer. the defendant shall notify third parties of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant's criminal record or
personal history oc characteristics and shall permit the probation officer to make such notifications and to confirm the defendant's compliance with such
notification requirement.
Case 2:13-cr-00115-NT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page4of6 PagelD#: 91

 

NO 2458 (Rey 09-08) Jndsment ina Criminal Case
Sheet 3C — Supervised Release
Judgment—Page 4 of 6
DEFENDANT: MICHAEL MURPHY

CASE NUMBER: 2:13-cr-115-001
SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

1.) Defendant shall not use or possess any controlled substance, alcohol or other intoxicant; and shall
participate in a program of drug and alcohol abuse therapy to the supervising officer's satisfaction. This shall
include testing to determine if Defendant has used drugs or intoxicants. Defendant shall submit to one test
within 15 days of release from prison and at least two, but not more than 120, tests per calendar year thereafter,
as directed by the supervising officer. Defendant shall pay/co-pay for services during such treatment to the
supervising officer's satisfaction. Defendant shall not obstruct or tamper, or try to obstruct or tamper, in any
way. with any tests: and.

2.) Defendant shall at all times readily submit to a search of his residence, and of any other premises under his
dominion and control. by his supervising officer, upon the officer's request when the officer has reasonable
basis to believe that such a search will lead to the discovery of evidence of violation of the terms of supervised
release. Failure to submit to such a search may be grounds for revocation.
Case 2:13-cr-00115-NT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page5of6 PagelD #: 92

AQ 2458 (Rev 09-08) Judgment ma Criminal Case
Sheet 5 = Criminal Monetin Penalties

DEFENDANT: MICHAEL MURPHY
CASE NUMBER: 2:13-cr-1 15-001

Judgment—Page 5 of 6

CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under the schedule of payments on Sheet 6,

 

Count Assessment Fine Restitution
One $ 100.00 $0 $0
Two $ 100.00 $0 $0
Three $ £00.00 $0 $0
Totals: $ 300.00 $0 $0
() The determination of restitution is deferred until . An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case (AO 245C) will be entered after such

determination.
[1] The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed below.
If the defendant makes a partial payment. each payee shall receive an approximately proportioned payment, unless specified otherwise in the

priority order or percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(i), all nonfederal victims must be paid before
the United States is paid.

Name of Pavee Total Loss* Restitution Ordered Priority or Percentage

TOTALS 3 $

C1] Restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement $

] The defendant must pay interest on restitution and a fine of more than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
fifteenth day after the date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(f. All of the payment options on Sheet 6 may be subject
to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

{_] The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay interest and it is ordered that:
Cl the interest requirement is waived for the C fine [1 restitution.

(J the interest requirement forthe (2) fine C) restitution is modified as follows:

*Findings for the total amount of losses are required under Chapters 109A, 10, LLOA, and 113A of Title 18 United State Code, for offenses
committed on or after September 13. 1994, but before April 23, 1996
Case 2:13-cr-00115-NT Document 61 Filed 06/04/14 Page 6of6 PagelD #: 93

AO 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgement in a Criminal Case

Sheet 6 = Schedule of Payments
Judgment—Page 6 of 6

DEFENDANT: MICHAEL MURPHY
CASE NUMBER: 2:13-cr-115-001

SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant's ability to pay. payment of the total criminal monetary penalties are due as follows:

i
4

0

Lump sum payment of $300.00 due immediately, balance due

Any amount that the defendant is unable to pay now is due and payable during the term of incarceration. Upon release from
incarceration, any remaining balance shall be paid in monthly installments, to be initially determined in amount by the supervising
officer. Said payments are to be made during the period of supervised release, subject always to review by the sentencing judge on
request, by either the defendant or the government.

3 not later than ,or

Clinaccordancewih OF Cc. (J por OF E, or LF below; or

Payment to begin immediately (may be combined with [] C. L] Dor LI F below); or

Payment in equal fe.g., weekly, aronthly, quarterty) installments of §$ over a period of

feat, Months or years), to commence fe.g., 30 or 60 days) afier the date of this judgment; or
Payment in equal (e.g, weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of

fe.2., months or years}, to commence (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from imprisonment to a

term of supervision: or

Payment during the term of supervised release will commence within fe.g., 30 ar 60 days) after release from
imprisonment. The court will set the payment plan based on an assessment of the defendant's ability to pay at that time; or

Special instructions rezarding the payment of criminal] monetary penalties:

Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise, if this judgment imposes imprisonment, payment of criminal monetary penalties is due
during imprisonment. All criminal monetary penalties, except those payments made through the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Inmate
Financial Responsibility Program, are made to the clerk of the court.

The defendant shall receive credit for all payments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.

O
O
Ol

Joint and Several

Defendant and Co-Defendant Names and Case Numbers (including defendant number), Total Amount, Joint and Several Amount, and

corresponding payee. if appropriate:

The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution.
The defendant shall pay the following court cost(s)}:

The defendant shall forfeit the defendant's interest in the following property to the United States:

Payments shall be applied in the following order: (1) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3) restitution interest, (4) fine principal, (5) fine
interest. (6) community restitution. (7) penalties. and (8) costs, including cost of prosecution and court costs.
