                      Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgmentina                         Document
                                 Criminal Case tor RevoMtltlli " '   91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 1 of 7

                               United States District Court
                       U.J"filteTRICT OF NEW HAMP^y^rcewi
                                                                                       ri -lVilCT SF N.a
             UNITED                         AMERICA                  JUDGMENT IN /FGlliiilllNAL CASE
                                                                      (For Revocation of Probation or Supervised Release)
                       JUL 1 Pn H 01
                                   V.
                                                                                    mh AUG 10 A l|:ue>^
                                                                      Case No. 12-cr-167-03-SM
                                                                      USM No: 12817-049
                       Quentin Simon
                                                                      Paul Garrlty, Esq.
                                                                      Defendant's Attomey
                                                                                                            S                     ^
                                                                                                            C?;               CDt/»
                                                                                                                              "SS—*

THE DEFENDANT:                                                                                              i=                5°
                                                                                                            zz


        ISl admitted guilt to violation of conditions 1 through 7 of the term of supervision.
                                                                                                            UJ
                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                         F"?
        • was found in vioiation of condition(s). after denial of guiit.                                                  O-n         '
                                                                                                            V
The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these vioiation(s):
                                                                                                                4=-           • 5
                                                                                                            cn

     violation Number                          Nature of Violation                                Violation Ended


      See next oaoe.



        The defendantis sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 7 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant
to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

El      The defendant has not violated condition No. 8. which was dismissed upon motion of the government, and is
        discharced as to such vioiationfs) condition.                                                ^
                                                                                                     CTJ

                                                                                                     e-r»



        IT IS FURTHER ORDERED thatthe defendant shall notify the United States Attorney f(ghis ctistet within 30
days of any change of name, residence, or mailing address until ail fines, restitution, costs, andSjpeci^^SOTments
imposed by this judgment are fully paid, if ordered to pay restitution, the defendant shall notify thg court aBdcO"'ted
States attorney ofany material change inthe defendant's economic circumstances                              ^         t»'m
                                                                                                                      >• m
                                                                                                                      :xi —
                                                                                                     ri)    P ^ m
                                                                 June 30,2015

 Last Four Digits of Defendants See. Sec. No.: 1232             .Datejof Imposition of Judgment
                                                                                                    CO

 Defendant's Year of Birth: 1984

 City and State of Defendant's Residence:
 Dover, MM
                                                                 Signature of Jud


                                                                 Steven J. McAuiiffe
                                                                 United States District Judge
                                                                 Name A Title of Judge
                  Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM Document 91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 2 of 7
CASE NUMBER:                                                                                            Judgment - Page 2 of 7
DEFENDANT:

                                              ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS

Violation   Nature of Violation                                                                   Date Violation
Number                                                                                            Concluded


1           Violation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did iliegaiiy possess and use a           November 12,2014
            controiied substance, marijuana, in vioiation of 21 U.S.C. 844(a) and NH RSA
            318-B:2, as evidenced by hiis verbai and written admission to his probation
            officer on 11 /25/2014.

            Violation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Criminal          January 1, 2015
            Possession of a Controiied Substance -3rd Degree: Stimulant with intent to Sell,
            class B felony, in vioiation of NY Penal Law 220:16, when he was observed to be
            in possession of 10.888 grams of crack cocaine.

            Vioiation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Criminal          January 1, 2015
            Tampering - 1st Degree, class D felony, in violation of NY Penal Law 145:20,
            when be was observed to destroy evidence.

            Vioiation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Resisting         January 1, 2015
            Arrest, class A misdemeanor, in vioiation of NY Penal Law 205:30, when he
            flailed his arms, refusing to be handcuffed.

            Violation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did .commit the crime of                  January 1, 2015
            Aggravated Unlicensed Operator - 3rd Degree: class U misdemeanor, in
            vioiation of NY Penal Law VTL0511 01, when he found to have two suspensions
            regarding his NY State driving privileges.

            Vioiation of Standard Condition #1: Defendant traveled to the Bronx, NY, without      January 1, 2015
            the permission of the court or the probation officer, as evidenced by his arrest by
            the NYC Police Department.

            Violation of Soeciai Condition: Defendant violated the terms and conditions of        January 1, 2015
            his home detention by traveling to the Bronx, NY, as evidenced by his arrest by
            the NYC Police Department.
    AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Case
                         Judgment1:12-cr-00167-SM
                                  in a Criminal Case for Revocation - Imprisonment
                                                              Document       91      Filed 08/10/15 Page 3 of 7
    CASE NUMBER; 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                     Judgment • Page 3 of 7
    DEFENDANT:   Quentin Simon


                                                           IMPRISONMENT

           The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a
total term of 12 months.




•     The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:




      The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.


       •   The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district.
       •    on _ at
       •    as notified by the United States Marshal.


•     The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons:
•      before _ on
•     as notified by the United States Marshal.
•     as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Officer.



                                                                 RETURN

    have executed this judgment as follows:




           Defendant delivered on _           al24ll5
at^^^2^ ^ PNtUniith acertified copy of this judgment.
            NleMi'^orlC (|Z3^
                                                                                                As\L-(h-rl50i\ V^rd^
                                                                                        UNITED 3TATC3 MAROI lAL




                                                                                        By:     V-tfOns,
                                                                                              Duputv U.O. Mdislldl
                      Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
 AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                             Document
                               in a Criminal Case for Revocation -       91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 4 of 7
 Supervised Release
 CASE NUMBER: 12-cM67-03-SM                                                                                           Judgment-Page4of 7
 DEFENDANT:           Quentin Simon
                                                SUPERVISED RELEASE
         Upon release from Imprisonment, the defendantshallbe on supervised release fora termof Four f4)Years.


Thedefendant shall report to the probation office In die district to which the defendantIs released within 72 hoursof release from the
custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state, or local crime.

The defendant shall not Illegally possess a controlled substance.

Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 14135a, thedefendant shallsubmit to DMA collection while incarcerated inthe Bureau ofPrisons, or at the
direction of the U.S. Probation Office.



For offenses committed on or affer September 13,1994:

The defendant shallrefrain from any unlavvfiil use of a controlled substance. The defendantshallsubmitto one drugtestwlthln 15 days
of release from Imprisonment and at least two periodicdrug tests thereafter, not to exceed 104 drug tests per year, as directed by the
probation officer..

• The above drugtesting condition is suspended based on the court's determination thatthe defendantposes a low risk of future
substance abuse. (Check Ifapplicable)

ISI The defendant shall not possess a firearm, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon.

Ifthisjudgment Imposes a fine or a restitution obligation. Itshall be a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay any such
fine or restitution that remains unpaid at the commencement ofthe termof supervised release In accordancewith the Schedule of
Payments set forth Inthe Criminal Monetary Penalties sheet of this judgment.

The defendantshall comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by thiscourt(set forth below). The defendantshall
also comply with the additional conditions on the attached page.

                                 STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

1)   The defendant shall not leave the judicial district without permissionof the court or probation officer;
2)   The defendantshall report to the probation officer In a mannerand frequency directed by the courtor probation officer;
3)   The defendant shall answer truthftjily all Inquiries by the probationofficer and follow instructions of the probation officer;
4)   The defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities;
5)   The defendant shall workregularly at a lawful occupationunless excused by the probation officer for schooling, training or other
     acceptable reasons;
6)   The defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days priorto any change In residence or employment;
7)   The^defendant shall refrain from excessive use of aicotrol and'shall not purchase, possess, use, distribute, or administerany    ..
     controlled substance or any paraphernalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician;
8)   The defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed, or administered;
9)   The defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged In criminalactivity, and shall not associate with any person convicted
     of a felony unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer;
10) The defendant shall permita probation officer to visithim or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shall permitconfiscation of
     any contraband observed In plain view of the probation officer;
11) The defendant shall notify the probation officerwithin seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement
     officer;
12) The defendant shall not enter Into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a lawenforcement agency without the
     permission of tiie court;
13) As directed bythe probation officer, the defendant shall notify third parties of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant's
     criminal record or personal history or characteristics, and shall permit the probation officerto make such notifications and to
     confirm the defendant's compliance with such notification requirement.
                      Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
 AO 2450 (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                             Document
                               in a Criminal Case for Revocation       91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 5 of 7
 Supervised Release
 CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                Judgment - Page5 of 7
 DEFENDANT:           Quentin Simon

                                  SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION
Inaddition, the defendant shall complywith the Ibllowing special conditions:

 As directed by the probation officer, the defendant shaii participatein a programapproved by the United States Probation
 Officefor treatment of narcotic addiction or drug or aicohoi dependency which wiil inciude testing for the detection of.
 substance use or abuse. The defendant shaii also abstain from the use of aicohoiic beverages and/or aii other intoxicants
 during and after the course of treatment. The defendant shaii pay for the cost of treatment to the extent he is able as
 determined by the probation officer.

 The defendant shaii participate in a program of mental health treatment, as directed by the probation officer, until such time
 as the defendant is released from the program by the probation officer. The defendant shall pay for the cost of treatment to
 the extent he is able as determined by the probation officer.

 The defendant shall submit his person, residence, office, or vehicle to a search conducted by a U.S. Probation Officer at a
 reasonable time and in a reasonable manner, based upon reasonable suspicion that contraband or evidence of a violation
 of a condition of release may exist; failure to submit to a search may be grounds for revocation; the defendant shall warn
 any other residents that the premises may be subject to searches pursuant to this condition.



Upon a finding of a violation of probation or supervised release, 1understand that the court may: (1) revoke supervision; (2)
extend the term of supervision; and/or (3) modify the conditions of supervision.

These conditions have been read to me. i fully understand the conditions and have been provided a copy of them.

        (Signed)



                      Defendant                                                            Date




                      U.S. Probation Officer/ Designated Witness                           Date
                         Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
    AO 245D (Rev. 09/11} Judgment                             Document
                                  in a Criminal Case for Revocatlon-     91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 6 of 7
    Crlmlnal Monetary Penalties
    CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                               Judgment - Page 6 of 7
    DEFENDANT:           Quentin Simon



                                         CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

           The defendant shall pay the following total criminal monetary penalties In accordance with the schedule of
payments set forth on Sheet 6.

                                                  Assessment                          Fine            Restitution
        Totals:                                       $200.00
                                                   Reimposed


•     The determination of restitution is deferred until. An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case (AO 2450) will be
entered after such determination.

•     The defendant shall make restitution (Including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed.

Ifthe defendant makes a partial payment, each payee shall receive an approximately proportioned payment, unless
specified otherwise In the priorityorder or percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(1),
all non-federal victims must be paid In full prior to the United States receiving payment.

     Name of Pavee                             **Total Amount of              Amount of Restitution     Priority Order or % of
                                               Loss                                       Ordered               Pymnt




                                               TOTALS:                    $    0.00                   $ 0.00



•     Ifapplicable, restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement.

• The defendant shall pay Interest on any fine or restitution of more than $2,500, unless the fine or restitution Is paid In
full before the fifteenth day after the date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3612(f). All of the payment options on
Sheet 6 may be subject to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3612(g).

•     The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay Interest, and It Is ordered that:

•     The Interest requirement Is waived for the     • fine     • restitution.

•     The Interest requlremehtTor the      • fine and/or      • restitution Is modified as follows:




  ** Findings for the total amount of losses are required under Chapters 109A, 110,110A, and 113A of Title 18 for
offenses committed on or after September 13,1994 but before April 23,1996.
                         Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
    AO 24SD (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                             Document
                                  in a Criminal Case for Revocation                 91 Filed 08/10/15 Page 7 of 7
    Schedule of Payments
    CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                                         Judgment - Page 7 of7
    DEFENDANT:              Quentin Simon



                                                      SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant's abiiity to pay, paymentof the totai criminai monetary penaitiesshaii be due as follows:

A       ^     Lump sum payment of $200.00 due immediately.

                       •    not later than      or
                      • in accordance with DC, • D, or • E below; or

B       •     Payment to begin immediately (may be combined with DC, • D, or • E below); or

C       •     Payment in installments of $ over a period of , to commence days after release from imprisonment to a term of
              supervision; or

p       •,    Within thic^jJ^yi^ of the commencement of supervision, payments shall be made in equal monthly installments
              of $ during the period of supervised release, and thereafter.

E       •     Special instructions regarding the payment of criminai monetary penaities:



Criminal monetary payments are to be made to Clerk, U.S. District Court, 55 Pleasant Street, Room 110, Concord, NH
03301. Payments shaii be in cash or in a bank check or money order made payable to Clerk, U.S. District Court.
Personal checks are not accepted.

Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise in the special instructions above, ifthis judgment imposes a period of
imprisonment, paymentof criminal monetary penaities shall be due during the period of imprisonment. Ail criminai
monetarypenalties, except those payments made through the Federal Bureau of Prisons' inmate Financial Responsibility
Program, are to be made payable to the clerk of the court, unless otherwise directed by the court, the probation officer, or
the United States Attorney. '

The defendant will receive credit for ail payments previouslymade toward any criminai monetary penaities imposed.

•            Joint and Several

            Defendant Name                       Case Number                           Joint and Several Amount



                  .-.varttn. -           3S!SltSE^~
•      The defendant shairp§yThe cost of prosecution.


•      The defendant shaii pay the following court cost(s):


•      The defendant shall forfeit the defendant's interest in the following property to the United States:




Payments shall be applied in the following order: (1) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3 )restitaJtion interest, (4) fine prlndpal, (5) community
restitution, (6) fine Interest, (7) penalties, and (8) costs, including cost of prosecution and court costs.
