                      Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                              Document
                              in a Criminal Case for Revocation       90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 1 of 7

                               United States District Court
                                    DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

             UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                  JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE
                                                                       (For Revocation of Probation or Supervised Reiease)


                                                                       Case No. 12-cr-167-03-SM
                                                                       USM No: 12817-049
                       Quentln Simon
                                                                       Paul Garrity, Esq.
                                                                       Defendant's Attorney

                                                                                                             c-n


THE DEFENDANT:                                                                                               C—        —

                                                                                                             cr
                                                                                                                    - r ,5005


        S admitted guilt to violation of conditions 1 through 7 of the term of supervision.                             2
                                                                                                             0      'rr\'p
        • was found in violation of condition(s) _after denial of guilt.
                                                                                                             "0            .O
                                                                                                                           -o
The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these vioiation(s):                                                   •F
                                                                                                             4=r
                                                                                                             01
     Violation Number                          Nature of Violation                                 Violation Ended


      See next oaoe.



        The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 7 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant
to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

Ei      The defendant has not violated condition No. 8. which was dismissed upon motion of the government, and is
        discharaed as to such vioiationfsl condition.



        IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant shall notify the United States Attorney for this district within 30
days of any change of name, residence, or mailing address until ail fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments
imposed by this judgment are fully paid, if ordered to pay restitution, the defentJ#i4 shall notifythe court and United
States attorney of any material change in the defendant's economic circumstances.

                                                                  June 30,2015

 Last Four Digits of Defendants Soc. Sec. No.: 1232               Date of imposition of Judgment


 Defendant's Year of Birth: 1984

 City and State of Defendant's Residence:
                                                                                                       —•
 Dover, NH
                                                                  Signature of Jud


                                                                  Steven J. McAullffe
                                                                  United States District Judge
                                                                  Name A Title of Judge
                  Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM Document 90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 2 of 7
CASE NUMBER:                                                                                            Judgment-Page 2 of 7
DEFENDANT:

                                              ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS

Violation   Nature of Violation                                                                   Date Vioiation
Number                                                                                            Concluded

1           Violation of Mandatory Condition. Defendant did illegally possess and use a           November 12, 2014
            controlled substance, marijuana, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 844(a) and NH RSA
            318-8:2, as evidenced by his verbal and written admission to his probation
            officer on 11/25/2014.

            Violation of Mandatorv Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Criminal          January 1, 2015
            Possession of a Controlled Substance -3rd Degree: Stimulant with Intent to Sell,
            class B felony, in violation of NY Penal Law 220:16, when he was observed to be
            in possession of 10.888 grams of crack cocaine.

            Violation of Mandatorv Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Criminal          January 1, 2015
            Tampering - 1st Degree, class D felony, in violation of NY Penal Law 145:20,
            when he was observed to destroy evidence.

            Violation of Mandatorv Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of Resisting         January 1, 2015
            Arrest, class A misdemeanor, in violation of NY Penal Law 205:30, when he
            flailed his arms, refusing to be handcuffed.

            Violation of Mandatorv Condition. Defendant did commit the crime of                   January 1, 2015
            Aggravated Unlicensed Operator - 3rd Degree: class U misdemeanor, in
            violation of NY Penal Law VTL0511 01, when he found to have two suspensions
            regarding his NY State driving privileges.

            Violation of Standard Condition #1: Defendant traveled to the Bronx, NY, without      January 1, 2015
            the permission of the court or the probation officer, as evidenced by his arrest by
            the NYC Police Department.

            Violation of Special Condition: Defendant violated the terms and conditions of        January 1, 2015
            his home detention by traveling to the Bronx, NY, as evidenced by his arrest by
            the NYC Police Department.
^^2^D(^Wj0^11jJudgmentinaCrim^alCasefor^^roration^lmgrisomert
                Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM Document 90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 3 of 7
    CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                           Judgment - Page 3 of 7
    DEFENDANT:   Quentin Simon


                                                      IMPRISONMENT

          The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a
totai term of 12 months.




•, The court makes the foliowing recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:




      The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshai.


      •   The defendant shali surrender to the United States Marshai for this district.
      •   on_at
      •   as notified by the United States Marshai.


•     The defendant shaii surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons:
•     before _ on _.
•     as notified by the United States Marshai.
•     as notified by the Probation or Pretriai Services Officer.



                                                           RETURN

    have executed this judgment as foiiows:




          Defendant deiivered on                                               to


at                           , with a certified copy of this Judgment.




                                                                              UNITED STATES MARSHAL




                                                                              By:
                                                                                    Deputy U.S. Marshai
                      Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
 AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                             Document
                               in a Criminal Case for Revocation -        90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 4 of 7
 Supervised Release
 CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                          Judgment - Page 4 of 7
 DEFENDANT:           Quentin Simon
                                                 SUPERVISED RELEASE
         Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of Four f4t Years.



The defendant shall report to the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release from the
custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state, or local crime.

The defendant shall not illegally possess a controlled substance.

Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 14135a, the defendant shall submit to DNA collection while incarcerated In the Bureau of Prisons, or at the
direction of the U.S. Probation Office.



For offenses committed on or after September 13,1994:

The defendant shall refrain from any unlawful use of a controlled substance. The defendant shall submit to one drug test within 15 days
of release from imprisonment and at least two periodic drug tests thereafter, not to exceed 104 drug tests per year, as directed by the
probation officer..

• The above drug testing condition is suspended based on the court's determinationthat the defendant poses a lowrisk of future
substance abuse. (Check if applicable)

ISI The defendant shall not possess a firearm, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon.

Ifthis judgment imposes a fine or a restitution obligation, it shall be a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay any such
fine or restitution that remains unpaid at the commencement of the term of supervised release in accordance with the Schedule of
Payments set forth in the Criminal Monetary Penalties sheet of this Judgment.

The defendant shall comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court (set forth beiow). The defendant shall
also comply with the additional conditions on the attached page.

                                 STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

1)   The defendant shall not leave the judicial district without permission of the court or probation officer;
2)   The defendant shall report to the probation officer in a manner and frequency directed by the court or probation officer;
3)   The defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow instructions of the probation officer;
4)   The defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities;
5)   The defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation unless excused by the probationofficerfor schooling, training or other
     acceptable reasons;
6)  The defendant shall notifythe probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employment;
7)  The defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not purchase, possess, use, distribute, or administer any
    controlled substance or any paraphemalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician;
8) The defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed, or administered;
9) The defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activity, and shall not associate withany person convicted
    of a felony unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer;
10) The defendant shall permit a probation officerto visit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shall permit confiscation of
    any contraband observed in plain view of the probation officer;
11) The defendant shall notifythe probation officerwithin seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement
     officer;
12) The defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency without the
      permission of the court;
13) As directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notifythird parties of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant's
    criminal record or personal history or characteristics, and shall permit the probation officer to make such notifications and to
     confirm the defendant's compliance with such notification requirement
 AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Case  1:12-cr-00167-SM
                      Judgment                             Document
                               in a Criminal Case for Revocation -       90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 5 of 7
 Supervised Release
 CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                Judgment - Page 5 of 7
 DEFENDANT:   Quentin Simon


                                  SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION
In addition, the defendant shall comply with the following special conditions:

 As directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall participate In a program approved by the United States Probation
 Office for treatment of narcotic addiction or drug or alcohol dependency which will Include testing for the detection of
 substance use or abuse. The defendant shall also abstain from the use of alcoholic beverages and/or all other Intoxicants
 during and after the course of treatment. The defendant shall pay for the cost of treatment to the extent he Is able as
 determined by the probation officer.

 The defendant shall participate In a program of mental health treatment, as directed by the probation officer, until such time
 as the defendant Is released from the program by the probation officer. The defendant shall pay for the cost of treatment to
 the extent he Is able as determined by the probation officer.

 The defendant shall submit his person, residence, office, or vehicle to a search conducted by a U.S. Probation Officer at a
 reasonable time and In a reasonable manner, based upon reasonable suspicion that contraband or evidence of a violation
 of a condition of release may exist; failure to submit to a search may be grounds for revocation; the defendant shall warn
 any other residents that the premises may be subject to searches pursuant to this condition.



Upon a finding of a violation of probation or supervised release, I understand that the court may: (1) revoke supervision; (2)
extend the term of supervision; and/or (3) modify the conditions of supervision.

These conditions have been read to me. I fully understand the conditions and have been provided a copy of them.

         (Signed)



                     Defendant                                                             Date




                     U.S. Probation Officer/ Designated Witness                            Date
                         Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM
    AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgment                             Document
                                  in a Criminal Case for Revocation-     90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 6 of 7
    Criminai Monetary Penalties
    CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                  Judgment - Page 6 of 7
    DEFENDANT:   Quentin Simon



                                       CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

      The defendant shall pay the following total criminal monetary penalties In accordance with the schedule of
payments set forth on Sheet 6.

                                                  Assessment                          Fine             Restitution
        Totals:                                       $200.00
                                                  Reim posed


•     The determination of restitution Is deferred until. An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case (AO 2450) will be
entered after such determination.

•     The defendant shall make restitution (Including community restitution) to the following payees In the amount listed.

Ifthe defendant makes a partial payment, each payee shall receive an approximately proportioned payment, unless
specified otherwise In the priorityorder or percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(1),
all non-federal victims must be paid In full prior to the United States receiving payment.

     Name of Pavee                             **Total Amount of           Amount of Restitution           Priority Order or % of
                                               Loss                                    Ordered                     Pymnt




                                               TOTALS:                     $   0.00                    $   0.00



•     If applicable, restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement.

• The defendant shall pay Interest on any fine or restitution of more than $2,500, unless the fine or restitution Is paid In
full before the fifteenth day after the date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3612(f). All of the payment options on
Sheet 6 may be subject to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3612(g).

•     The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay Interest, and It Is ordered that:

•     The Interest requirement Is waived for the      • fine     • restitution.

•     The Interest requirement for the      • fine and/or      • restitution Is modified as follows:




  ** Findings for the total amount of losses are required under Chapters 109A, 110,11 OA, and 113A of Title 18 for
offenses committed on or after September 13,1994 but before April 23,1996.
    AO 245D (Rev. 09/11) Judgment in a Criminal Case for Revocation -
    Schedule of Payments Case 1:12-cr-00167-SM                     Document 90 Filed 06/30/15 Page 7 of 7
    CASE NUMBER: 12-cr-167-03-SM                                                                                                         Judgment - Page 7 of 7
    DEFENDANT:           Quentin Simon



                                                     SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant's abiiity to pay, payment of the totai criminai monetary penaities shali be due as foiiows:

A       Ei    Lump sum payment of $200.00 due immediateiy.

                     •   not iater than       or
                     • in accordance with DC, •                D, or • E below; or

B       •     Payment to begin immediateiy (may be combined with DC, • D, or • E below); or

0       •     Payment in installments of $ over a period of , to commence days after reiease from imprisonment to a term of
              supervision; or

D       •     Within thirty days of the commencement of supervision, payments shaii be made in equai monthiy instaiiments
              of $ during the period of supervised release, and thereafter.

E       •     Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penaities:


Criminai monetary payments are to be made to Cierk, U.S. District Court, 55 Pieasant Street, Room 110, Concord, NH
03301. Payments shaii be in cash or in a bank check or money order made payabie to Cierk, U.S. District Court.
Personai checks are not accepted.

Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise in the speciai instructions above, if this judgment imposes a period of
imprisonment, payment of criminai monetary penaities shaii be due during the period of imprisonment. Aii criminal
monetary penalties, except those payments made through the Federai Bureau of Prisons' Inmate Financial Responsibility
Program, are to be made payable to the clerk of the court, unless otherwise directed by the court, the probation officer, or
the United States Attorney. '

The defendant wiii receive credit for aii payments previousiy made toward any criminai monetary penaities imposed.

•            Joint and Several

            Defendant Name                     Case Number                             Joint and Several Amount




•       The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution.


•       The defendant shaii pay the foiiowing court cost(s):


•       The defendant shaii forfeit the defendant's interest in the foiiowing property to the United States:




Payments shall be applied In the following order: (1) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3 )restitution Interest, (4) fine principal, (5) community
restitution, (6) fine interest,*(7) penalties, and (8) costs, including cost of prosecution and court costs.
