                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                )
                                        )
      v.                                )     1:11-cr-00205-JAW
                                        )
JOWENKY NUÑEZ                           )


     ORDER ON THE DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR CHANGE OF VENUE

      The Court denies a defendant’s motion to change venue of a proceeding in a

petition to revoke his supervised release from the District of Maine to the Southern

District of New York.

I.    PROCEDURAL HISTORY

      On January 12, 2012, a federal grand jury indicted Jowenky Nuñez along with

eight other co-conspirators for engaging in a conspiracy to distribute and possess with

the intent to distribute cocaine and cocaine base and indicted Mr. Nuñez for his

possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug-trafficking offense. Superseding

Indictment (ECF No. 81).      The superseding indictment alleged that Mr. Nuñez

committed the drug-trafficking crime in the District of Maine and elsewhere and that

he committed the firearms offense in the District of Maine. Id. at 1-3. On January

18, 2013, Mr. Nuñez pleaded guilty to the drug-trafficking count only. Min. Entry

(ECF No. 366). The Government’s Version of the Offense that Mr. Nuñez admitted

was true on January 18, 2013, stated that he joined a conspiracy that was distributing

cocaine and crack cocaine in the Bangor, Maine area and that he committed the drug-
trafficking crime while in Bangor. Gov’t’s Version of the Offense at 1-2 (ECF No. 361).

On December 1, 2014, the Court imposed a sentence of ninety-seven months of

incarceration, five years of supervised release, no fine, and a $100 special assessment.

J. (ECF No. 806). On December 6, 2014, Mr. Nuñez appealed to the Court of Appeals

for the First Circuit, Notice of Appeal (ECF No. 814), and on October 19, 2016, the

First Circuit affirmed the sentence. United States v. Nuñez, 840 F.3d 1 (1st Cir.

2016).

         On June 24, 2019, the Government filed a petition to revoke Mr. Nuñez’s

supervised release. Pet. for Warrant or Summons for Offender under Supervision

(ECF No. 945). The Government alleged that Mr. Nuñez commenced supervised

release on March 22, 2019, and had been residing in the Bronx Community

Residential Reentry Center in New York City under a special condition added on

March 29, 2019. Id. at 1. The Government alleged that Mr. Nuñez violated two

conditions of his supervised release. Id. at 1-2. The first alleged violation is that he

was unsuccessfully discharged from Bronx Community Residential Reentry Center

for violating facility rules and the second is that he violated the “no drugs” condition

of supervised release. Id.

II.      THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

         A.    Jowenky Nuñez’s Motion to Change Venue

         On August 6, 2019, Mr. Nuñez filed a motion seeking to transfer venue for the

hearing on his alleged violation of special condition three of his supervised release to

the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York.            Def.



                                           2
Jowensky Nunez’ Mot. to Change Venue Pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 21(b) at 1 (ECF

No. 961) (Def.’s Mot.). Mr. Nuñez says “[t]he allegation in this case is that defendant

possessed an unknown liquid, presumed to be alcohol though no test has been

conducted, and that an altercation occurred at the halfway house where he was

residing in New York City when staff took the subject liquid from defendant.” Id.

Mr. Nuñez claims that the United States Probation Office has recommended a prison

term of nine months even though the liquid in question has not been tested nor has

he tested positive for any substance. Id. at 2. Mr. Nuñez maintains his innocence.

Id.

      Mr. Nuñez cites ten factors courts consider when deciding whether to transfer

venue as set forth in Platt v. Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co., 376 U.S. 240

(1964). Def.’s Mot. at 3. Mr. Nuñez argues these factors demonstrate that the

interests of convenience and justice favor changing venue to the Southern District of

New York. Id. at 3-4. Mr. Nuñez avers:

      1) the defendant resides in New York City;
      2) all potential witnesses reside or work in New York City;
      3) the contested event took place in New York City;
      4) all relevant documents in this matter were generated in New York
      City;
      5) counsel on the Rule 5 stage of proceeding worked in New York City
      and the Federal Defender’s Office in New York City has agreed to
      represent defendant;
      6) the indigent defendant will incur considerable expense to travel to
      Bangor, Maine to try this matter;
      7) the trial location is remote for both the New York City defendant and
      the New Hampshire based AUSA;
      8) the case has already been docketed in the Southern District of New
      York;
      9) defendant’s ability to continue to comply with conditions of release
      will be compromised by travel to Bangor, Maine; and

                                          3
       10) not one of the foregoing factors weighs in favor of denying transfer.

Id. at 4.

       B. The Government’s Opposition

       On August 9, 2019, the Government filed its opposition to the motion for

change of venue. Obj. to Def.’s Mot. to Change Venue Pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P.

21(b), Ct. Docket Doc. # 961 (ECF No. 962) (Gov’t’s Opp’n). In its response, the

Government says that Mr. Nuñez’s motion “conflates two legal principles, Fed. R.

Crim. P. 21, Transfer for Trial, and 18 U.S.C. § 3605, Transfer of jurisdiction over a

probationer [or supervised releasee] and seeks to have the Court apply the wrong

principle.” Id. at 2.

       C. Jowenky Nuñez’s Reply

       Mr. Nuñez’s reply was due on August 23, 2019, but he did not file a reply.

III.   DISCUSSION

       Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 21(b) provides, “[u]pon the defendant's

motion, the court may transfer the proceeding, or one or more counts, against that

defendant to another district for the convenience of the parties, any victim, and the

witnesses, and in the interest of justice.” FED. R. CRIM. P. 21(b). Courts possess broad

discretionary power in determining whether to transfer a criminal prosecution to

another district. United States v. Quiles-Olivo, 684 F.3d 177, 181-82 (1st Cir. 2012).

In deciding whether to grant a motion to transfer venue, Mr. Nuñez correctly points

out that a court considers a nonexclusive set of factors. See Platt, 376 U.S. at 243-44.

However, Rule 21 applies to the transfer of venue with respect to trial.



                                           4
        Mr. Nuñez is not really seeking a transfer of his case for trial but a transfer of

jurisdiction of his supervised release from the District of Maine to the Southern

District of New York, so that the Court in New York can assume jurisdiction over his

supervised release.         Individuals on supervised release who seek a transfer of

jurisdiction must comply with section 3605 of title 18 of the United States Code.

Section 3605 states:

        A court, after imposing a sentence, may transfer jurisdiction over a
        probationer or person on supervised release to the district court for any
        other district to which the person is required to proceed as a condition
        of his probation or release, or is permitted to proceed, with the
        concurrence of such court. A later transfer of jurisdiction may be made
        in the same manner. A court to which jurisdiction is transferred under
        this section is authorized to exercise all powers over the probationer or
        releasee that are permitted by this subchapter or subchapter B or D of
        chapter 227.

18 U.S.C. § 3605. The statute contemplates that the court that imposed sentence

retains jurisdiction over the supervised releasee and sets out a procedure for the

transfer of jurisdiction from the sentencing court to another jurisdiction. Although

the Court is not aware of any First Circuit authority directly on point, the language,

“with the concurrence of such court,” has been viewed as requiring “the transferee

court’s acceptance of or consent to the transfer.” 1 United States v. Stile, No. 1:11-cr-

00185-JAW, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 29158, at *3 (D. Me. Feb. 25, 2019) (citing United

States v. Votta, 212 F. App’x 142, 143 (3d Cir. 2007); United States v. Fernandez, 379




1       The Second Circuit has a slight variation. In United States v. Murdock, the Second Circuit
concluded that the transfer of jurisdiction could take place in a transferee jurisdiction if the sentencing
court requires it as a condition of supervised release. 735 F.3d 106, 112-13 (2d Cir. 2013). As this
Court has not made a transfer to the Southern District of New York a condition of Mr. Nuñez’s
supervised release, the Court need not address whether Murdock could apply.

                                                    5
F.3d 270, 272 (5th Cir. 2004); United States v. Ohler, 22 F.3d 857, 858-59 (9th Cir.

1994)).

      Here, Mr. Nuñez was released from incarceration on March 22, 2019, with no

intention of residing within the District of Maine. He asked to live in New York City,

where he was born, grew up, was schooled, where his girlfriend (current or ex), son,

and mother live, and where he considers home. Revocation Report at 6; Revised

Presentence Investigation Report ¶¶ 39-53. Mr. Nuñez came to Maine in December

2010 and remained in Maine intermittently until November 2011 to sell drugs.

Revised Presentence Investigation Report ¶¶ 3-13.      In accordance with standard

procedure, the United States Probation Office in the District of Maine agreed to allow

him to be supervised in New York City and contacted the United States Probation

Office in the Southern District of New York to determine whether it would accept a

transfer. Revocation Report at 6. However, the United States Probation Office for

the Southern District of New York refused to accept a transfer of supervision of Mr.

Nuñez. Id.

      As Mr. Nuñez’s family and connections were in New York City, after some

further consultation with the United States Probation Office for the District of Maine,

the United States Probation Office for the Southern District of New York agreed to

allow Mr. Nuñez to reside temporarily in its District with a long-term goal of

ultimately transferring jurisdiction to the Southern District.     Id.   However, the

Probation Office for the Southern District conditioned his presence in New York City

on the condition that he be placed in a residential recovery center for three months.



                                          6
Id. On March 28, 2019, Mr. Nuñez agreed to a modification of his conditions of

supervised release to add a three-month term in a residential recovery center. Req.

for Modifying the Conditions or Term of Supervision with the Consent of the Offender

(ECF    No.   943),     Attach.   1,   Waiver   of   Hr’g   to   Modify   Conditions   of

Probation/Supervised Release or Extend Term of Supervision.

       The agreement of the Probation Office of the Southern District of New York to

allow Mr. Nuñez to temporarily reside there over its supervision did not constitute a

formal transfer of jurisdiction from Maine to New York under 18 U.S.C. § 3605. In

fact, the United States Probation Office for the Southern District of New York never

accepted a formal transfer of Mr. Nuñez’s supervised release case to its district. Thus,

jurisdiction over Mr. Nuñez remains with this Court until a formal transfer takes

place and it would be not only questionable jurisdictionally but also dubious

practically for a court with jurisdiction to transfer a case for hearing to a court

without jurisdiction.

       In these circumstances, the Court will not transfer the hearing on the

Probation Office’s petition to revoke Mr. Nuñez’s supervised release to a district that

has not assumed jurisdiction over his case and, in fact, at least to date has refused to

accept such a transfer. The Court need not reach whether in an unusual case it could

order a transfer to another district of a supervised release petition solely for the

purpose of holding a hearing under Rule 21(b) in the absence of a transfer of

jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C. § 3605. Whatever unique circumstances might justify




                                            7
such an order either under Rule 21 or, if not applicable, under the inherent authority

of the court are not present here.

IV.   CONCLUSION

      The Court DENIES Defendant Jowenky Nuñez’s Motion to Change Venue

Pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 21(b) (ECF No. 961).

      SO ORDERED.

                                 /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                 JOHN A. WOODOCOCK, JR.
                                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 11th day of October, 2019




                                          8
