             Case 1:18-cr-10375-LTS Document 100 Filed 12/10/19 Page 1 of 5



                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                                                             Criminal No. 18-10375-LTS
         vs.
                                                              Leave to File Granted 12/6/19
JERMAINE TINDAL



     GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO DEFENSE SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

             The United States submits this response to the defendant’s Sentencing Memorandum

(Dkt. No. 96), to briefly address the defendant’s Second Amendment and Title 26 arguments. The

defendant does not challenge that the Guideline Sentencing Range of 30 to 37 months was properly

calculated under the facts of the case, but rather objects to the application of the GSR to the

defendant under the circumstances of this case, and argues for a variance. The Government

responds that its recommendation of a 30-month sentence of imprisonment as well as supervised

release for three years thereafter is a reasonable and appropriate sentence for the defendant’s

conduct and relevant conduct in this case, notwithstanding his arguments, and a variance is not

justified.

    I.         The Defendant’s Conviction Does Not Offend the Second Amendment, and the
               Second Amendment Does Not Provide Grounds For a Variance

         Binderup v. AG of United States, 836 F.3d 336, 339 (3d Cir. 2016), cert. denied, 137 S. Ct.

2323 (2017) – the Third Circuit case upon which the defendant relies for his Second Amendment

argument – notes that 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) does not violate the Second Amendment on its face,

so the only possible challenge is an as-applied challenge. Even if Binderup were the law of the

First Circuit, the defendant’s conviction and the application of USSG § 2K2.1(a)(4)(B) under the
         Case 1:18-cr-10375-LTS Document 100 Filed 12/10/19 Page 2 of 5



facts of this case would not offend the Second Amendment, as the firearm the defendant possessed

and sold was a Title 26 firearm and therefore is not subject to any Second Amendment protections.

        The Supreme Court in District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 634-35 (2008), held

that at the core of the Second Amendment is the right of “law-abiding, responsible citizens to use

arms in defense of hearth and home.” The Supreme Court noted that this right is not limitless, and

expressly acknowledged the exception to the right to bear arms by felons, and noted that “the

Second Amendment does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law-abiding

citizens for lawful purposes, such as short-barreled shotguns.” Id. at 625. Restrictions on such

firearms are permissible because they fall outside the “historical understanding of the scope of the

right.” Id. Because the particular gun that the defendant possessed, and then sold to a Cooperating

Witness, here is one of the weapons that the Supreme Court has held may properly be restricted

without offending the Second Amendment, any as-applied challenge by the defendant here would

fail.

        Similarly, the Second Amendment does not provide any basis for a variance in this case.

The defendant characterizes his predicate felony as a “nominal felony” because it is a third-offense

shoplifting conviction, and argues that he should not be prohibited from owning firearms on the

basis of such a conviction. While the dollar value of the items stolen in the shoplifting is

indisputably low, the defendant would not be considered a felon, or made a prohibited person, on

the basis of that shoplifting alone – rather, it was the fact that it was a third offense that made the

crime a felony, and punishable by up to ten years of imprisonment. The repeated conduct and

multiple convictions place the defendant outside the group of “law-abiding, responsible citizens”

whose right to bear arms is recognized by Heller. Id. at 635. Also notably, the defendant was not




                                                  2
           Case 1:18-cr-10375-LTS Document 100 Filed 12/10/19 Page 3 of 5



“us[ing] arms in defense of hearth and home,” id., but rather was selling them to someone he had

never even met, bringing his young child to the sale, and attempting to broker other gun deals.

          The circumstances of the defendant’s conduct in this case, and his criminal history, are not

so innocuous that a variance is justified on Second Amendment grounds.

    II.      The Defendant’s Short-Barreled Shotgun Measuring Less Than 26 Inches Is
             Classified As A Title 26 Firearm, and USSG § 2K2.1(a)(4)(B) Properly Applies

          The firearm that the defendant possessed and sold to the CW was examined by ATF and

determined to be a Harrington and Richardson, model 440, 12-gauge shotgun, with an approximate

barrel length of 11.5 inches and an overall length 24 inches, with no visible serial number, and it

appeared to have been modified from the original manufacturer’s configuration. See Ex. 1 (ATF

report). Accordingly, it qualifies as an NFA “firearm” under 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).

          The defendant argues that because a different arms manufacturer sought and obtained a

classification letter from ATF that its different firearm (the Mossberg Model 590) with different

specifications (most importantly, an overall length of greater than 26 inches) was determined not

to be an NFA firearm, the U.S. Sentencing Commission should treat defendant’s firearm as falling

outside the NFA too1, and since it does not, this Court should grant a variance. This argument

must fail. The classification letter that the defendant so heavily relies upon states that ATF has

previously classified weapons with shotgun-type receivers, that have never had a shoulder stock

attached, that are fitted with a “bird’s head” grip in lieu of a shoulder stock, with a 14-inch barrel,

and with an overall length exceeding 26 inches, as falling outside the definition of NFA firearms

under Title 26. Dkt. 96-1 at 2. It goes on to assess the newly released (2017) Mossberg Model


1
 In his PSR objections, defendant acknowledges that “defendant’s weapon is still an NFA
‘firearm’ under the definition of § 5845(a)(2) because of its overall length of 24 as opposed to 26
inches . . . .” PSR Objection No. 2 (PSR at 28).

                                                   3
         Case 1:18-cr-10375-LTS Document 100 Filed 12/10/19 Page 4 of 5



590, 12-gauge pump action firearm, which is marked by a serial number, and whose original

manufacture specifications include a bird’s head grip, a 14-7/16 inch barrel, and an overall length

of 26½ inches. It determines that the firearm is not a shotgun, and classifies it as falling outside

the definition of NFA firearms under Title 26. Id. at 3-4. ATF’s Mossberg classification letter

includes the following caveat: “We caution that these findings are based on the sample as

submitted. If the design, dimensions, configuration, method of operation, or materials used were

changed, our determinations would be subject to review.” Id. at 4.

       As demonstrated above, the firearm that Tindal possessed and sold was different in material

respects. Most importantly, it was determined by ATF to be a shotgun, and it was measured to

have a barrel length of only 11.5 inches and an overall length of 24 inches. Accordingly, it fits

squarely within the definition of a Title 26/NFA firearm, as the defendant in his Objections

acknowledges.

       The overall length is a critical difference because the overall length goes towards

concealability. ATF has reasonably found that a weapon with a shotgun’s power and destructive

capability, that can be concealed on a person (or, in this case, in a stroller), should be subject to

greater regulation.2 Here, Tindal possessed, concealed, and sold such a firearm without being

permitted to lawfully possess any firearm. Accordingly, USSG § 2K2.1(a)(4)(B) is properly

applied, and a variance is not merited.

                                          CONCLUSION

       As set forth in the government’s original Sentencing Memorandum, a sentence of

incarceration at the low end of the Guidelines, along with a significant period of supervised


2
 Indeed, in the Mossberg classification letter, ATF noted that if the weapon were concealed on a
person, its classification decision on even the Mossberg firearm might change. Id. at 4.

                                                 4
          Case 1:18-cr-10375-LTS Document 100 Filed 12/10/19 Page 5 of 5



release, is necessary in this case to reflect the seriousness of the offense of conviction, to

promote respect for the law, to adequately punish Tindal for his criminal conduct, to deter him

and others from offending in the same way again, and to protect the public.

       For the foregoing reasons, and those to be articulated at the sentencing hearing, the

government respectfully recommends that this Court impose a sentence of 30 months

imprisonment, to be followed by a three-year term of supervised release, as well as the required

special assessment. Such a sentence would be sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to

reflect the seriousness of the offense and the goals of sentencing.

                                                       Respectfully submitted,

                                                       UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

                                                       By its attorney,

                                                       ANDREW E. LELLING
                                                       United States Attorney

                                                       /s/ Elianna J. Nuzum
                                                       Elianna J. Nuzum
                                                       Assistant United States Attorney
                                                       John Joseph Moakley U.S. Courthouse
                                                       One Courthouse Way, Suite 9200
                                                       Boston, MA 02210
                                                       elianna.nuzum@usdoj.gov
                                                       617.748.3251

Dated: December 10, 2019

                                  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        Undersigned counsel certifies that this document filed through the ECF system will be
sent electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing
(NEF) and paper copies will be sent to those indicated as non-registered participants.

                                               /s/ Elianna J. Nuzum
                                               Elianna J. Nuzum
                                               Assistant United States Attorney
Dated: December 10, 2019

                                                   5
