                         THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                          FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO



     UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

         v.

     MIGUEL CASTRO‐SANTIAGO,                                Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)



         Defendant.



                                       OPINION & ORDER1

        Before the Court is defendant Miguel Castro‐Santiago’s (“defendant”) motion to

suppress. ECF No. 22. The government responded in opposition. ECF No. 24. The Court held

an evidentiary hearing on the matter. ECF No. 27. For the following reasons, the motion to

suppress is DENIED. ECF No. 22.

I.      Background

        Defendant is charged with one count of being a prohibited person—a drug user—in

possession of a firearm, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(3). ECF No. 11. Defendant was arrested

at Vista Alegre Public Housing Project (“Vista Alegre”) near Caguas, Puerto Rico, during an

“enforcement operation” on July 5, 2018. ECF Nos. 1‐1; 22 at 1.




1 This Opinion and Order is entered Nunc Pro Tunc for record completeness. Defendant plead guilty to an
Information on January 27, 2020. See Crim. No. 20‐041‐1 (ADC).
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                    Page 2

       During the evidentiary hearing, the Court heard testimony from Puerto Rico Police

Department (“PRPD”) Agent Eduardo Sánchez‐Ortíz (“Agent Sánchez”); PRPD Sergeant Berlitz

David‐Rodríguez (“Sergeant David”); and Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (“ATF”)

Task Force Officer Hector González‐Rivera (“TFO González”) about the circumstances

surrounding defendant’s arrest.

       Agent Sánchez testified that his specialized unit targeted high crime areas in Caguas and

had identified a known drug point in Vista Alegre. The unit had organized an intervention at

that drug point for July 5, 2018. Approximately seven officers arrived in two unmarked cars

around 1:05 p.m. Agent Sánchez and Sergeant David rode in the second car with two other

officers. The second car parked near a horse stable while the first car continued driving. When

the officers entered Vista Alegre, people in the area began running. Defendant was one of those

individuals. Agent Sánchez and Sergeant David testified that they did not know what defendant

was doing or where he was standing before their arrival. Agent Sánchez observed defendant

run past him while carrying a black messenger bag. Agent Sánchez exited the vehicle after

defendant ran past, identified himself as police, and ordered defendant to stop. Defendant

proceeded to run faster, heading towards a horse stable located at the bottom of a hill. Agent

Sánchez testified that he believed the bag contained narcotics and possibly weapons, noting later

in his testimony that he has seen individuals use this style of bag to carry narcotics and firearms

in other interventions. Sergeant David also testified that, in her professional experience,

individuals use these bags to conceal firearms while they are outdoors.
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                                 Page 3

        Agent Sánchez pursued defendant, never losing sight of him. Sergeant David remained

uphill. As the chase approached the hill by the stables, Agent Sánchez and Sergeant David

observed defendant toss the bag while defendant continued running uphill in the direction of

Sergeant David. The contents of the bag were not visible at that time. Agent Sánchez retrieved

the discarded bag while defendant continued running towards Sergeant David who was

approaching from the opposite direction. Upon grabbing the bag, Agent Sánchez felt that the

bag contained a heavy object and concluding it was firearm he yelled “Gun!” to Sergeant David.

Sergeant David indicated defendant was almost crawling his way up the hill towards her due

to the slope. Upon hearing Agent Sánchez yell “Gun,” she drew her firearm and ordered

defendant to stay on the ground. Agent Sánchez then handcuffed defendant while Sergeant

David advised him of his Miranda rights. Sergeant David testified that defendant did not

request counsel at that time.

        The agents conducted a pat‐down of defendant and seized at least one cell phone.2 The

agents then transported defendant to the Office of the Caguas Intelligence Unit. Sergeant David

testified that defendant did not request an attorney while officers transported him to the station.

Once at the station, Agent Sánchez read a Miranda Rights form to defendant, in Spanish, line by

line, that defendant initialed and signed, indicating that he did not wish to waive his rights. ECF

Nos. 1‐1 at 2; 22‐2. Agent Sánchez testified that defendant did not want to talk. Agent Sánchez




2Officers seized two cell phones from defendant, but Agent Sánchez could not recall if they found one in the black
bag or both on defendant’s person.
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                    Page 4

and Sergeant David both testified that defendant did not request an attorney at that time. Once

defendant indicated he did not wish to speak, officers did not interview him or challenge his

decision to remain silent. Sergeant David testified that the only question officers asked

defendant after that point was whether he would like some pizza.

       Officers then proceeded to inventory defendant’s property. Inside the black bag, agents

found a small bag of a green, leafy substance; a plastic vial of a green, leafy substance; a bag of

smoking wrapping papers; one 9 mm Glock pistol; two 9 mm Glock magazines; a waistband

holster; fifty rounds of 9 mm ammunition; and one clear plastic bag containing a machinegun

conversion kit for a Glock pistol. ECF No. 1‐1 at 1–2; Govt Ex. 2, 2A.

       PRPD agents contacted the ATF. When the ATF agents arrived around 4:00 p.m., PRPD

provided them with the background information of the case and the Miranda form defendant

had earlier signed before bringing the ATF agents to defendant. Agent Sánchez and Sergeant

David informed the ATF agents that defendant wanted to remain silent. Agent Sánchez testified

that defendant had not requested an attorney at the time. TFO González testified that PRPD

officers had not informed him that defendant requested counsel at any point. However, a report

from ATF signed by its preparer, Special Agent Jorge Escribano (“Agent Escribano”) on July 20,

2018, noted that defendant “requested legal representation” (the “ATF report”). ECF No. 22‐1.

       Around 4:45 p.m., the ATF agents met with defendant and repeated the Miranda

warnings, at which time defendant voluntarily indicated he was willing to speak and signed a

Miranda form indicating such. Govt Ex. 3, 3A. TFO González testified that it is very common
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                      Page 5

for suspects to choose not to talk to PRPD but to talk to ATF. He described defendant’s

demeanor during the interview as calm, friendly, and cooperative. Defendant told the ATF

agents that he has been a regular marijuana user for the past seven years. Defendant also

consented to a cell phone search and signed a corresponding consent form. Id. Govt Ex. 4; ECF

No. 1‐1 at 2. TFO González testified that at no point while he was at the PRPD station in Caguas

did he hear defendant request a lawyer or say that he wanted to stop talking. TFO González

indicated that he had reviewed the audio recording of defendant’s interview the week prior to

the hearing to confirm that defendant did not request an attorney during their interview.

       Defendant raises two challenges in his suppression motion. He argues that PRPD

arrested him without cause and that PRPD and ATF violated his Miranda rights by reengaging

with him after he repeatedly invoked his rights to counsel and to remain silent. ECF No. 22 at 2.

II.    Legal Standard

       The Fourth Amendment protects against unreasonable seizures, including seizure of the

person. California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. 621, 624 (1991). An arrest is “the quintessential ‘seizure

of the person’ under our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence.” Id. “An arrest requires either

physical force . . . or, where that is absent, submission to the assertion of authority.” Id. at 626

(emphasis in original). This standard “does not remotely apply . . . to the prospect of a policeman

yelling ‘Stop, in the name of the law!’ at a fleeing form that continues to flee. That is no seizure.”

Id. Cf. id. at 624 (“‘A ship still fleeing, even though under attack, would not be considered to have

been seized as a war prize.’” (citing The Josefa Segunda, 10 Wheat. 312, 325–26 (1825)). To
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                       Page 6

effectuate a formal arrest, officers must have probable cause to believe that a crime has been

committed. United States v. Rasberry, 882 F.3d 241, 246–47 (1st Cir. 2018), cert. denied, 2018 WL

3575762 (U.S. Dec. 3, 2018). It is also a prerequisite “for a de facto arrest.” Id.

       A person’s presence in a known high‐crime area, without more, is not enough to support

a reasonable suspicion that a person is committing a crime. Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 124

(2000) (citing Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 52 (1979)). However, “nervous, evasive behavior,”

such as “unprovoked flight upon noticing the police,” “is a pertinent factor in determining

reasonable suspicion.” Id. “Headlong flight—wherever it occurs—is the consummate act of

evasion: It is not necessarily indicative of wrongdoing, but it is certainly suggestive of such.” Id.

An evaluation of reasonable suspicion is a fact‐sensitive inquiry that “must be performed in

real‐world terms.” United States v. Ruidíaz, 529 F.3d 25, 29 (1st Cir. 2008). It is “a practical,

commonsense determination—a determination that entails a measurable degree of deference to

the perceptions of experienced law enforcement officers.” Id. (citations omitted). “[N]o direct

link between the suspect and the suspected criminal activity need be forged in order to achieve

reasonable suspicion.” Id.

        “In Miranda v. Arizona, the Court determined that the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments’

prohibition against compelled self‐incrimination required that custodial interrogation be

preceded by advice to the putative defendant that he has the right to remain silent and also the

right to the presence of an attorney.” Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477, 481–82 (1981) (citing

Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 479 (1966)). “[A]fter initially being advised of his Miranda rights,
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                        Page 7

[an] accused may himself validly waive his rights and respond to interrogation.” Id. at 484

(citation omitted).

       A suspect’s “request for counsel must be clear and unambiguous.” United States v.

Oquendo‐Rivas, 750 F.3d 12, 18 (1st Cir. 2014) (citing Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452, 459 (1994).

“Where a request, marred by ambiguity or equivocation, suggests only ‘that the suspect might

be invoking the right to counsel, our precedents do not require the cessation of questioning.’”

Id. at 19 (quoting Davis, 512 U.S. at 459). Courts assess whether a suspect’s request “be such that

‘a reasonable police officer in the circumstances would understand the statement to be a request

for an attorney.’” Id. (quoting Davis, 512 U.S. at 459); see Davis, 512 U.S. at 459 (noting that “a

suspect need not speak with the discrimination of an Oxford don” to adequately “articulate his

desire to have counsel present” (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). “Immediately

after a suspect has invoked the right to counsel, all questioning must cease until such counsel is

provided.” Oquendo‐Rivas, 750 F.3d at 18 (citing Edwards, 451 U.S. at 485).

       In contrast, “an invocation of the right to remain silent does not automatically bar the

resumption of questioning at a later time.” Id. at 17. Courts apply a four‐part test to determine

“whether the resumption of questioning is permissible: (1) whether a reasonable period of time

passed prior to the resumption, (2) whether the same officer resumed questioning, (3) whether

the suspect received refreshed Miranda warnings, and (4) whether questioning concerned the

same alleged crime” (“Mosley factors”). Id. at 17–18 (citing Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 104–

06 (1975)) (additional citations omitted). A court also “must account for the totality of the
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                    Page 8

circumstances, with an eye to determining whether the suspect retained the ability to choose

whether and when to speak.” Id. at 18 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

III.   Analysis

       A.     Probable Cause for the Arrest

       Defendant first argues that PRPD arrested him without probable cause. ECF No. 22 at 3.

According to defendant, PRPD arrived “en masse” at Vista Alegre, “jumped out of their

unmarked vehicles,” “yelled ‘police,’” “followed several individuals” even though “[t]hey

observed no demonstrably illegal activity,” and “then ordered [defendant] to the ground at

gunpoint,” at which time they “conducted a full search of his person.” Id. at 1, 3. Defendant also

notes that the officers seized several “innocuous items such as a cell phone and car keys” during

the pat down. Id. at 3. It is “this sequence of events,” that defendants argues “undoubtedly

amount[s] to a seizure” and “is tantamount to a de facto arrest,” requiring probable cause. Id.

Defendant’s argument rests on the notion that “[t]here is nothing illegal about walking or even

running away from the police.” Id. at 4. Defendant asserts that “[t]his is especially true when the

police themselves have provoked any movement that may occur.” Id. Defendant claims that

PRPD’s presence at Vista Alegre to conduct an enforcement operation “was specifically

designed to provoke and intimidate.” Id. at 4–5. Accordingly, defendant asserts that suppression

is warranted “of any and all statements and other evidence obtained.” Id. at 5.

       Defendant’s description of the sequence of events omits many important details

described in the criminal complaint and during the hearing. Sergeant David did not simply exit
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                     Page 9

the unmarked police vehicle and order defendant to the ground at gun point to conduct a pat

down. Rather, a car containing four agents, including Agent Sánchez and Sergeant David,

stopped at a known drug point. Before officers could even exit the vehicle, people in the area

began running away, including defendant. Both PRPD agents testified that they observed

defendant carrying a bag akin to bags they have seen used in previous interventions as vessels

for drugs and guns. Agent Sánchez identified himself and shouted at defendant to stop, which

prompted him to speed up. Agent Sánchez pursued defendant. Both he and Sergeant David

observed defendant discard his bag. Agent Sánchez recovered the bag, felt a gun inside, and

alerted his partner. Then, Sergeant David ordered defendant, at gun point, to get on the ground.

       Defendant’s argument turns on the assumption that the PRPD agents’ pursuit of him

constituted a “seizure.” This argument is similar to the argument rejected by the Supreme Court

in California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. 621 (1991). In that case, late one evening, two police officers

“were on patrol in a high‐crime area of Oakland, California,” in “street clothes but wearing

jackets with ‘Police’ embossed on both front and back,” and driving in an unmarked car. Id. at

622. During their patrol, “they saw four or five youths huddled around a small red car parked

at the curb. When the youths saw the officers’ car approaching they apparently panicked, and

took flight.” Id. at 622–23. This raised the officers’ suspicion and they decided to give chase. Id.

at 623. One officer pursued defendant Hodari on foot. Id. The officer observed Hodari toss “what

appeared to be a small rock.” Id. The officer then “tackled Hodari, handcuffed him, and radioed

for assistance.” Id. The rock Hodari discarded was crack cocaine. Id.
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                      Page 10

       The question presented to the Supreme Court was “whether, at the time he dropped the

drugs, Hodari had been ‘seized’ within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment,” rendering the

drugs “the fruit of that seizure.” Id. at 623–24. If Hodari was not “seized” during the pursuit, he

abandoned the drugs, rendering the drugs lawfully recovered by the police. Id. at 624. The Court

assumed, for the purposes of argument, that the officer’s “pursuit qualified as a ‘show of

authority’ calling upon Hodari to halt,” and held that a show of authority, without submission

thereto, does not constitute a seizure. Id. at 625–26. The Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment

standard for seizure of a person, requiring either physical force or submission to an officer’s

assertion of authority, “does not remotely apply . . . to the prospect of a policeman yelling ‘Stop,

in the name of the law!’ at a fleeing form that continues to flee.” Id. at 626. “Mere words will not

constitute an arrest.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, the Court

concluded that the officer’s pursuit of Hodari did not constitute a seizure. Id.

       The Supreme Court also noted the policy implication of Hodari’s arguments, seeking “to

stretch the Fourth Amendment beyond its words and beyond the meaning of arrest,” noting

that “[s]treet pursuits always place the public at some risk, and compliance with police orders

to stop should therefore be encouraged.” Id. at 627. The Court surmised that “[o]nly a few of

those orders . . . will be without adequate basis,” and “invariably . . . the responsible course [is]

to comply”; “[u]nlawful orders will not be deterred . . . by sanctioning through the exclusionary

rule those of them that are not obeyed.” Id. (emphasis in original).
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                Page 11

       Here, under the Hodari framework, defendant was observed in a high‐crime area,

carrying a bag police associate with drugs and guns, engaging in “nervous, evasive behavior,”

i.e. “unprovoked flight upon noticing the police.” See Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 124. These factors

combined gave the officers reasonable suspicion to pursue defendant, as in the Hodari case and,

upon discovery of the gun in the discarded bag, probable cause to arrest him. Defendant was

not seized prior to Sergeant David’s arrest, which occurred after Agent Sánchez discovered and

alerted about the discarded gun.

       B.     Miranda Rights

       Defendant next argues that the authorities “trampl[ed]” his “specifically and

unambiguously invoked” Constitutional rights to counsel and to remain silent. ECF No. 22 at

5–8. He argues that he invoked his rights on PRPD’s Miranda form, yet the ATF agents engaged

in questioning. Id.

              1.      Right to Counsel

       Defendant argues that he specifically and unequivocally requested counsel, pointing to

the July 20, 2018 ATF report which states, “Castro‐Santiago denied ownership of the black

satchel bag and requested legal representation.” ECF No. 22‐1. He also notes that “[a] plethora

of authority” supports his argument that he unequivocally and unambiguously invoked his

right to counsel when he checked the box on the PRPD Miranda form indicating, “I understand

the rights that those [Miranda] warnings bestow upon me and I decided TO NOT waive the

same.” ECF Nos. 22 at 5; 22‐2 at 2 (emphasis in original). He argues that any ambiguity the
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                  Page 12

officers may have perceived from his invocation of his rights via the Miranda form is attributed

to ambiguities in their form, not in his invocation.

       The government argues that defendant’s invocation of his right to counsel was not clear

or unequivocal. ECF No. 24 at 6. The government notes that defendant did not submit an

affidavit attesting to his requests for counsel. Id. Agent Sánchez, TFO González, and Sergeant

David all testified that defendant never requested an attorney. And Sergeant David clarified

that she understood defendant’s response on the Miranda form as indicating simply that he did

not wish to waive his rights. In contrast, defendant affirmatively exercised his right to remain

silent with PRPD. But, the government argues, defendant’s invocation of his right to remain

silent does not also amount to an invocation of his right to counsel. Id. at 7.

       The Court notes that the ATF report cited by defendant in his motion to suppress was not

submitted into evidence at the hearing; it was prepared by Agent Escribano, who did not testify;

and TFO González could not specifically recall reading the report. Defense counsel asked TFO

González whether he adopted Agent Escribano’s ATF report, to which the government objected.

The Court sustained the objection. Defense counsel also asked Agent Sánchez whether he had

told the ATF agents upon their arrival at the station that defendant had requested legal

representation, which he answered in the negative and indicated that his memory was clear on

this point. The defense elicited no further testimony or evidence to substantiate the accuracy of

the ATF report. Thus, the report is not properly before the Court for consideration.
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                   Page 13

       The Court rejects defendant’s argument that by checking the box on the PRPD form, he

clearly and unambiguously invoked his right to counsel. The PRPD form indicates that

defendant chose not to waive his Miranda rights. Sergeant David testified as to having the same

understanding. This does not amount to a clear and unambiguous statement requesting legal

representation; indeed, it does not amount to a statement as to legal representation at all. It is

simply a notation that defendant is not waiving any Miranda rights.

       Defendant cites several cases holding that ambiguities in Miranda forms should be

construed in favor of a suspect’s affirmative request for counsel. ECF No. 22 at 5–7. The form in

this case, however, is not ambiguous. Thought it employs a double‐negative structure, the

unfortunate grammar does not render it ambiguous. And, the caselaw on which defendant relies

is not binding on this Court. Thus, the evidence as to defendant’s request for counsel amounts

to the PRPD form indicating that he did not wish to waive his rights and Agent Sánchez,

Sergeant David, TFO González’s testimonies that defendant never requested counsel.

              2.     Right to Remain Silent

       Defendant also argues that the ATF agents’ interrogation after he invoked his right to

remain silent violated the Fifth Amendment. ECF No. 22 at 7–9. The government responds that,

although defendant invoked his right to remain silent with PRPD, “he freely and voluntarily

waived his rights to speak with ATF Agents.” ECF No. 24 at 10.

       Because defendant never requested an attorney, ATF agents were not automatically

forbidden from interviewing him simply because he had earlier expressed his right to remain to
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                                       Page 14

silent to PRPD officers. See United States v. Lugo Guerrero, 524 F.3d 5, 11–12 (1st Cir. 2008). Under

the four‐part Mosely test cited above, courts consider: “(1) whether a reasonable period of time

passed prior to the resumption [of questioning], (2) whether the same officer resumed

questioning, (3) whether the suspect received refreshed Miranda warnings, and (4) whether

questioning concerned the same alleged crime.” Oquendo‐Rivas, 750 F.3d at 17–18 (citing Mosley,

423 U.S. at 104–06) (additional citations omitted).


       Defendant invoked his right to remain silent with PRPD at 1:45 p.m. ECF No. 22‐2. Three

hours later, ATF agents met with defendant. They repeated to him the Miranda warnings and

provided defendant with a form to confirm that he understood his rights. ECF No. 24‐2. At 4:46

p.m., defendant initialed and signed the form, electing to waive his rights. Id. There is no

evidence suggesting that defendant was not well‐treated during the intervening three hours.

Indeed, Sergeant David testified that meanwhile, PRPD officers offered defendant pizza. There

is also no evidence that any of the officials aggressively questioned defendant or otherwise

attempted to coerce his waiver. Thus, although the ATF interview concerned a similar crime,

borne out of the same events, it is clear from the evidence that defendant was in control of the

decision to provide a statement. See Lugo Guerrero, 524 F.3d at 12. Accordingly, defendant’s

statements to the ATF agents were not elicited in violation of his right to remain silent.

IV.    Conclusion

       Probable cause supported defendant’s arrest, defendant never invoked his right to

counsel, and officials did not violate defendant’s right to remain silent.
Crim. No. 18‐446 (ADC)                                                         Page 15

      Accordingly, defendant’s motion to suppress is DENIED. ECF No. 22.

      SO ORDERED.

      At San Juan, Puerto Rico, on this 28th day of February, 2020.

                                               S/AIDA M. DELGADO‐COLÓN
                                                United States District Judge
