Case 1:19-cr-10163-IT Document 197 Filed 04/30/20 Page 1 of 3

AO 199A (Rev, $2/11} Order Setting Conditions of Release Page | of 3 Pages

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

for the

District of Massachusetts

United States of America
¥.
Case No. 19-cr-10163-IT
CLIFFORD GOMES
Defendant

Nae ee et et ae

ORDER SETTING CONDITIONS OF RELEASE
IT IS ORDERED that the defendant’s release is subject to these conditions:
(}) The defendant must not violate federal, state, or local law while on release.
(2) The defendant must cooperate in the collection of a DNA sample if it is authorized by 42 U.S.C. § 14135a.

(3) The defendant must advise the court or the pretrial services office or supervising officer in writing before making
any change of residence or telephone number.

(4) The defendant must appear in court as required and, if convicted, must surrender as directed to serve a sentence that
the court may impose.

The defendant must appear at: United States District Court District of Massachusetts
Place

on

Date and Time
If blank, defendant will be notified of next appearance.

(5) The defendant must sign an Appearance Bond, if ordered.
Case 1:19-cr-10163-IT Document 197 Filed 04/30/20 Page 2 of 3

AQ 199B (Rev. 12/11) Additional Conditions of Release Page 2 of 3. Pages

ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF RELEASE
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the defendant’s release is subject to the conditions marked below:

( ) (6) The defendant is placed in the custody of:
Person or organization oo
Address fontv if above is an arganization) a.
City and state Tel. No.

who agrees to {a} supervise the defendant, (b) use every effort to assure the defendant's appearance atall court proceedings, and (c} notify the court immediately
if the detendant violates a condition of release or is no longer in the custodian’s custody.

 

 

 

Signed:

 

 

stodian Date
(X) (7) The defendant must:

( X) (a) submit to supervision by and report for supervision to the US Probation / Pretrial _

telephone number ene no later than As directed

(b) continue or actively seek employment and sumbit on going verification to US Probation /Preirial as s directed.
(c) continue or start an education program.
{d} surrender any passport to: .
{c) not obtain a passport or other international teavel document.
(0 abide by the following restrictions on personal association, residence, or travel:

 

 

 

NN
ee ee ee

 

( ) (g} avoid contact with , directly or indirectly, with a any, person who ts or may ‘bea Viclim/witness in n investigation « or - prosecutic Ion,
including:

 

( 3 (hb get medical or psychiatric treatment:

( 3 @ return to custody each al ~~ o’elock after being released al ~~” gtelock for employment, schooling,
or the following purposes:

 

 

( } Q) maintain residence at a halfway house o or community corrections center, a3 ‘the pretrial services 5 offi 1€ OF supervising officer considers
necessary.

(k) not possess a firearm, destructive device, or other weapon.

() notuse alcohol ( X J at all ( } excessively.

(m) not use or unlawfully possess a narcotic drug or other controlled substances defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802, unless prescribed by a licensed

medical practitioner.

submit to testing fora prohibited substance if required by the pretrial services office or supervising officer. Testing may be used with random

frequency and may include urine testing, the wearing of a sweat patch, a remote alcohol testing system, and/or any form of prohibited

substance screening or testing. The defendant must not obstruct, attempt to obstruct, or tamper with the efficiency and accuracy of prohibited

substance screening or esting.

{ X) (0) participate in a program of inpatient or outpatient substance abuse therapy and counseling if directed by the pretrial services office or

supervising officer when state quarantine order is lifted.

participate in one of the following location restriction programs and comply with ils requirements as directed.

( )G) Curfew. You are restricted to your residence every day ( }irom to , Or ( }as
directed by the pretrial services office or supervising officer; or

( ) i) Home Detention. Youare restricted to your residence at all times except for employment; education; religious services; medical,
substance abuse, or mental health treatment; attorney visits; court appearances; court-ordered obligations; or other activities
approved in advance by the pretrial services office or supervising officer; or

(X )(ii) Home Incarceration. You are restricted to 24-hour-a-day luck-down at your residence except for medical necessities and
court appearances, groceries shopping, medical necessilies of caregiver or other activities specifically approved by the court,

submit to location monitoring as directed by the pretrial services offive or supervising officer and comply with all of the program
C 3 @ requirements and instructions provided. Refrain from obstructing or attempting to obstruct or tamper in any fashion with the efficiency
and accuracy of any location monitoring equipment.

{ 3 You must pay all or part of the cost of the program based on your ability to pay as determined by the pretrial services office or
supervising officer.

 

a

mS

(%) @

—

(X) (p

‘ae

{ ) @) report as soon as possible (24 hours), to the pretrial services office or supervising officer, every contact with law enforcement personnel,
including arrests, questioning, or traffic stops.
( X} (s) Reside in Residence approved by US Pretrial and Probation _
Case 1:19-cr-10163-IT Document 197 Filed 04/30/20 Page 3 of 3

AO 199C (Rev. 09/08} Advice of Penalties Page 3 sso of 33 s~Pages
ADVICE OF PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS

TO THE DEFENDANT:
YOU ARE ADVISED OF THE FOLLOWING PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS:

Violating any of the foregoing conditions of release may result in the immediate issuance of a warrant for your arrest, a

revocation of your release, an order of detention, a forfeiture of any bond, and a prosecution for contempt of court and could result in imprisonment, a fine, or
both.

While on release, if you commit a federal felony offense the punishment is an additional prison term of not more than ten years

and for a federal misdemeanor offense the punishment is an additional prison term of not more than one year. This sentence will be consecutive (/.¢., in addition
to) to any other sentence you receive.

It is a crime punishable by up to ten years in prison, and a $250,000 fine, or both, to: obstruct a criminal investigation;
tamper with a witness, victim, or informant; retaliate of attempt to retaliate against a witness, victim, or informant; or mtimidate or atlempl to intimidate a
witness, victim, juror, informant, or officer of the court. The penalties for tampering, retaliation, or intimidation are significantly more serious if they involve
a killing or attempted killing,
If, after release, you knowingly fail to appear as the conditions of release require, or to surrender to serve a sentence,
you may be prosecuted for failing to appear or surrender and additional punishment may be imposed. If you are convicted of:
(1) an offense punishable by death, life imprisonment, or imprisonment for a term of fifteen years or more — you will be fined
not more than $250,000 or imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both;
(2) an offense punishable by imprisonment for a term of five years or more, but less than fifteen years — you will be fined not
more than $250,000 or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both;
(3) any other felony — you will be fined not more than $250,000 or imprisoned not more than two years, or both;
(4) a misdemeanor — you will be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
A term of imprisonment imposed for failure to appear or surrender will be consecutive to any other sentence you receive. In
addition, a failure to appear or surrender may result in the forfeiture of any bond posted.

Acknowledgment of the Defendant

T acknowledge that I am the defendant in this case and that Iam aware of the conditions of release. I promise to obey all conditions of
release, to appear as directed, and surrender to serve any sentence imposed. 1am aware of the penalties and sanctions set forth above.

¥ -

Defendant's Signature

Directions to the United States Marshal

( X ) The defendant is ORDERED released after processing on 5/1/20.
The United States marshal is ORDERED to keep the defendant in custody until notified by the clerk or judge that the defendant has posted
bond and/or complied with all other conditions for release. Ifstill in custody, the defendant must be produced before the appropriate judge
at the time and place specified.

Date: 4/30/20 Th
Judicial Officer's Signature

Noreen Russo, Deputy Clerk.
Printed name and title
