         Case 1:19-cr-10159-MLW Document 46 Filed 05/04/20 Page 1 of 4



                               UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                     )
                                             )
               v.                            )       NO.      19-cr-10159-MLW
                                             )
JOVANI MIRANDA,                              )
                                             )
       Defendant                             )



                    GOVERNMENT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

       On January 28, 2020, the defendant Jovani Miranda (hereinafter, the “defendant” or

“Miranda”) pleaded guilty to a one count Superseding Indictment, which charged Felon in

Possession of a Firearm and Ammunition, in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section

922(g)(1). There is no written plea agreement in this case.

       The Pre-Sentence Report prepared by the United States Probation Office, dated May 4,

2020 (PSR), concluded that Miranda had a total offense level (TOL) of 21, a criminal history

category (CHC) of III, and a guideline sentencing range (GSR) of 46 months to 57 months in

prison. (PSR ¶ 81). The government agrees with this calculation, and the defendant has not

objected to the calculation.

       For the reasons discussed herein, and as will be addressed at the sentencing hearing, the

government requests that this Court sentence Miranda to 46 months in prison, followed by three

years of supervised release. The government believes that such a sentence is the minimum

sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in Title

18, United States Code, Section 3553.

       The Offense. As set out in more detail in the PSR, on January 15, 2019, Miranda was

arrested by the Boston Police following a motor vehicle stop in Dorchester. At the time of the
         Case 1:19-cr-10159-MLW Document 46 Filed 05/04/20 Page 2 of 4



stop, Miranda was sitting in the front passenger seat of the motor vehicle. Officers observed

Miranda with an open bottle of alcohol partially concealed beneath his jacket, as well as a small

plastic cup. At one point, while speaking with the officers, Miranda opened the bottle of alcohol

and took several large gulps directly from the bottle. Officers asked him to exit the vehicle, and

while exiting, Miranda stated, “I have a firearm on me.” Officers observed Miranda’s jacket

pocket was snapped closed and clearly weighted down by a heavy, bulging object. When officers

attempted to remove the object from Miranda’s jacket pocket, Miranda stated, “Be careful, it’s

loaded, it’s a revolver.” Officers then unsnapped the pocket and removed a revolver. Officers

asked Miranda to produce a license to carry, to which he responded, “Nah, I ain’t got one of those.”

Miranda was then placed into custody.

       The revolver seized from Miranda contained five live rounds of ammunition and one spent

shell casing. A Boston Police Firearms Examiner subsequently conducted a test firing and analysis

of the firearm and ammunition and concluded that the revolver is a firearm, as defined by M.G.L.

c. 140, § 121, and that the live and spent rounds found inside the revolver are ammunition, as

defined by the same statute. The examiner concluded, based on microscopic comparison, that the

spent round was fired from the revolver.

       The firearm and ammunition were subsequently examined by a special agent with the

United States Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) for the purpose of

determining their identity, origin, and classification under Title 18, United States Code, Section

921(a)(3). The ATF special agent determined that the firearm is a Rossi, Model R462, .357

Magnum caliber revolver with an obliterated serial number that was manufactured in Brazil by

Forjas Taurus under contract with Rossi. After being manufactured in Brazil, the firearm was

imported into the United States by Braztech International, LC of Miami, Florida. The ATF special
            Case 1:19-cr-10159-MLW Document 46 Filed 05/04/20 Page 3 of 4



agent further determined that the five rounds of .357 magnum caliber ammunition were

manufactured by Vista Outdoor Inc., formerly ATK (Alliant Techsystems). Vista Outdoor does

not presently have, nor has it historically had, any manufacturing facilities in Massachusetts.

Based on where the gun and ammunition were manufactured, they would have had to have traveled

in interstate and/or foreign commerce in order to be in Massachusetts and possessed by Miranda.

       Criminal History. As is set out in detail in the PSR, Miranda has a lengthy criminal

history. (PSR ¶¶ 30-46). That history includes eight convictions for drug offenses, assault and

battery, trespass, attempting to break and enter, threatening to commit a crime, and threat to do

bodily harm. (PSR ¶¶ 31-38).

       Argument. A sentence of 46 months in prison, the low end of the guidelines, followed by

three years of supervised release, is appropriate here. The details of the offense warrant a

significant sentence. Miranda was carrying a loaded revolver with an obliterated serial number,

while drinking alcohol as a passenger in a vehicle with three other occupants. In addition, as noted

above, there was a spent round in the revolver that appears to have been fired from the gun he was

carrying.

       Miranda has a criminal history that includes multiple convictions for crimes involving

domestic violence for either hitting or threatening to hit his girlfriend. (PSR ¶¶ 34, 35, 36, 37). In

fact, in the days prior to his arrest, Miranda was allegedly involved in another domestic disturbance

incident that resulted in the police being called. (PSR ¶ 10). Miranda has previously received

minor sentences for the crimes he has committed, and he has continued to violate the law. The

circumstances of his possession of this firearm, combined with his history of criminal conduct,

including domestic violence, warrant a significant sentence. Miranda’s sentence must serve

general deterrence, specifically deter him, promote respect for the law, and protect the public. See
         Case 1:19-cr-10159-MLW Document 46 Filed 05/04/20 Page 4 of 4



18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). To accomplish these goals, the government recommends that this Court

sentence Miranda to a low-end guideline sentence of 46 months in prison. The government further

recommends that Miranda be placed on supervised release for three years, to commence when

Miranda completes the custodial portion of this sentence.



DATED: May 4, 2020

                                                     Respectfully submitted,

                                                     ANDREW E. LELLING
                                                     United States Attorney

                                             By:     /s/ Alathea E. Porter
                                                     Alathea E. Porter
                                                     Assistant U.S. Attorney



                                CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I hereby certify that on May 4, 2020 this document filed through the ECF system will be
sent electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing
(NEF) and paper copies will be sent to those indicated as non-registered participants.

                                                     /s/ Alathea E. Porter
                                                     Alathea E. Porter
                                                     Assistant U.S. Attorney
