            Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 1 of 6



                      IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                   )
                                           )
v.                                         )       NO. 15CR30036-MGM
                                           )
BIENVENIDO NUNEZ                           )


                BIENVENEDO NUNEZ’ SENTENCING MEMORANDUM



       Bienvenido Nunez (“Bienvenido”), through counsel, files the instant sentencing

memorandum in support of a sentence below the advisory guideline range. Bienvenido

respectfully requests that this Honorable Court exercise its discretion to adopt the agreed

upon sentence recommendation and impose a sentence “sufficient, but not greater than

necessary” to achieve the sentencing purposes of 18 U.S.C. §3553(a).



       I.       BACKGROUND



       Since 2013 Bienvenido was living with Damaris Arocho at 1089 Worthington Street,

Apartment 3A in Springfield, MA with their two children, ages 9 and 8. Damaris has three

children from a previous relationship (ages 12, 18 and 15). Bienvenido was a member if the

Latin Kings. Bienvenido was a member in New Jersey and was convinced, at that time, that

the Latin Kings were a positive organization that would benefit him as they tried to benefit

their community. He turned out to completely wrong and Bienvenido tried to constantly

distance himself from the Latin Kings. He was even criticized for not participating in


                                               1
         Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 2 of 6



“King” activities. Despite this Bienvenido did associate with other Latin King members in

this area. On or about August 4, 2015 a friend and fellow Latin King member asked

Bienvenido to procure ½ ounce of cocaine for him. Knowing what he was doing and

knowing it was wrong Bienvenido was going to sell that friend 14 grams of cocaine. As an

example of his ineptness Bienvenido ended up losing ½ of the intended product prior to the

sale and sold 7 grams of cocaine to his fellow Latin King member. Bienvenido was arrested

at his home on November 9, 2015. Subsequent to his arrest Bienvenido volunteered and

showed law enforcement officers the location of a firearm he possessed inside the residence.

The firearm was not known to anyone else in the residence and was not accessible by anyone

other than him.

       Bienvenido readily admits that he was a member of the Latin Kings. Since his

incarceration Bienvenido successfully completed the SRG Program at the Wyatt Detention

Facility in January 2016. (See, Certificate of Completion, SRG Program, Dated: January

2016) He has renounced his involvement with them. During his detention Bienvenido was

given the privilege of working in their kitchen facility and has maintained a positive and

productive attitude while incarcerated. He is well thought of by the staff at Wyatt as

evidenced by the letter attached from his Unit Manager at Wyatt. (See, Letter Dated June

29, 2016 from Susan Devonis, Wyatt Detention Facility)

       From the very beginning of this case Bienvenido accepted responsibility for his

wrongdoing and is very remorseful for his conduct. He knows that his actions have caused

tremendous harm. He is deeply sorry for his actions and looks forward to expressing remorse

at this hearing. He recognizes that his actions are the result of his own conduct. He initially

believed that he was assisting his friend but was well aware that what he did was wrong. He



                                              2
         Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 3 of 6



does not offer this explanation as an excuse, but only to show that he his actions were

motivated by something in him that defied logic.

       He has been extremely fortunate to have the continued support of his girlfriend and

the mother of his children. Bienvenido is very fortunate in having a supportive family.

Bienvenido has enjoyed regular visits at Wyatt with his children. (See, Letters in Support of

Bienvenido). He has had the difficult conversation with his children about what he has

done; that their father made some huge mistakes and must now pay for them. They

understand that he will not be with them physically until he completes his sentence. They

remain supportive. Although their relationship is somewhat non-traditional it is nevertheless

important and has evolved to where Bienvenido has all the support they have to offer.

Bienvenido hopes to make all possible efforts to survive his punishment and spend the

future working and supporting his family. His goals are simple. He wants to reunite with his

family. He wants to get a job in order to provide the support and stability that will be

required to keep his family together. These, to some, are not lofty goals but they should not

be discounted.    Bienvenido will face many challenges upon his release and during his

supervised probation. Although the road may be difficult and not without its setbacks

Bienvenido is determined to be the father and the support person his family needs.



        II.   LAW AND ARGUMENT


       The defendant respectfully asks the Court to impose a sentence of 18 months of

incarceration and a three year period of supervised release as outlined in the plea agreement. In

seeking a sentence below the applicable advisory guideline range sentence the defendant notes

that the United States Sentencing Guidelines, as promulgated by the United States


                                               3
         Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 4 of 6



Sentencing Commission, no longer bind federal courts. United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220,

259 (2005). Indeed, the United States Supreme Court’s landmark Booker decision declared the

mandatory provisions of the USSG unconstitutional. Id. Booker, however, reaffirmed a

sentencing court’s duty to sentence a defendant in accordance with those provisions of the

Sentencing Reform Act specified in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a).

       The §3553(a) factors include: (1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the

history and characteristics of the defendant, (2) the need for the sentence to reflect the

seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment, to

afford adequate deterrence, to protect the public, and to provide the defendant with needed

educational or vocational training or medical care, (3) the kinds of sentences available, (4) the

kinds of sentence and the sentencing range established by the United States Sentencing

Guidelines, (5) any pertinent policy statement, (6) the need to avoid unwarranted sentence

disparities among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar

conduct, and (7) the need to provide restitution to any victim of the offense. United States v.

Robinson, 433 F.3d 31, 35 (1st Cir. 2005). The district court, while not bound by the guidelines,

still must consult and consider them when imposing a sentence. Booker, 543 U.S. at 264.

Courts of appeals cannot disturb a district court’s sentence unless the appellate court finds that

sentence unreasonable. See Id. The United States Supreme Court clarified post-Booker

sentencing procedure in Gall v. United States, 128 S. Ct. 586 (2007) where the Gall Court

indicated that when sentencing a defendant,

               [A] district court should begin all sentencing proceedings by correctly
       calculating the applicable Guidelines range. As a matter of administration and to
       secure nationwide consistency, the Guidelines should be the starting point and
       the initial benchmark. The Guidelines are not the only consideration, however.
       Accordingly, after giving both parties an opportunity to argue for whatever
       sentence they deem appropriate, the district judge should then consider all of
                                                4
         Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 5 of 6



       the §3553(a) factors to determine whether they support the sentence requested by
       a party. In so doing, he may not presume that the Guidelines range is reasonable.
       He must make an individualized assessment based on the facts presented. If he
       decides that an outside-Guidelines sentence is warranted, he must consider the
       extent of the deviation and ensure that the justification is sufficiently
       compelling to support the degree of the variance. We find it uncontroversial that
       a major departure should be supported by a more significant justification than a
       minor one. After settling on the appropriate sentence, he must adequately explain
       the chosen sentence to allow for meaningful appellate review and to promote the
       perception of fair sentencing.
128 S. Ct. at 596-597 (internal citations and quotations omitted).


       While the First Circuit has noted that sentencing courts must employ “an increased

degree of justification commensurate with an increased degree of variance”, from the advisory

sentencing guideline range, it has also held that under a post-Gall rubric, “there is no stringent

mathematical formula that cabins the exercise of the sentencing court's discretion.” United

States v, Martin, 520 F.3d 87 (1st Cir. 2008). Indeed, after Gall, the sentencing inquiry-once

the court has duly calculated the GSR-ideally is broad, open-ended, and significantly

discretionary. At that point, sentencing becomes a judgment call, and a variant sentence may be

constructed based on a complex of factors whose interplay and precise weight cannot even be

precisely described.” Id. At 91-92 (internal citations and quotations omitted) (affirming a 91-

month downward deviation from the advisory sentencing guideline range).

         III.   CONCLUSION

   The Defendant plead guilty to these offenses on May 13, 2016 under Rule 11 with a binding

plea agreement. It calls for 18 months of incarceration followed by three years of supervised

release. Bienvenido has spent 9 months and 10 days in custody prior to this date. He is

requesting that this court sentence him to the agreed upon sentence and three years of supervised

release. Bienvenido has, from the beginning, taken responsibility for his actions. To the extent


                                                5
          Case 3:15-cr-30036-RWZ Document 46 Filed 08/12/16 Page 6 of 6



possible he has been dealing with the problems that caused this behavior. He understands that

any further criminal conduct will likely result in extremely long and severe punishment. He is

intensely committed to surviving his incarceration and rejoining society to reunite and become a

productive father. Supervised release after confinement will not be without challenges.

    Given his prospects for rehabilitation, a high degree of certainty that he will not re-offend,

his lack of dangerousness to the community Bienvenido would respectfully request this Court

accept the agreed recommendation contained within the binding plea agreement.




                                                 Respectfully submitted,
                                                 BIENVENIDO NUNEZ
                                                 By and through his attorney,

                                                  /s/ Charles E. Dolan
                                                 Charles E. Dolan, BBO#546344
                                                 Raipher D. Pellegrino, Associates, PC
                                                 265 State Street
                                                 Springfield, Massachusetts 01103
                                                 Tel.: (413) 746-4400
                                                 Fax: (413) 746-2816
                                                 ced@rdpalaw.com




                                          Certificate of Service

         I, Charles E. Dolan, hereby certify that on this the 15th day of August, 2016, I have served all
parties of record registered with ECF for this matter with a true copy of the foregoing motion by virtue of
transmitting the same to the Court via the CM/ECF system.

                                                  /s/ Charles E. Dolan
                                                 Charles E. Dolan



                                                    6
