Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 1 of 11

U.S. Department of Justice

Carmen M. Ortiz
United States Attorney
District of Massachusetts

 

 

Main Reception: (617) 748-3100 John Joseph Moakley United States Courthouse
1 Courthouse Way
Suite 9200
Boston, Massachusetts 02210

December 31, 2014

Edward P. Ryan, Jr., Esq.
O'Connor & Ryan

61 Academy Street
Fitchburg, MA 01420-7517

Re: United States v. Krystian Gubernat
Criminal No. 14-mj-4021-DHH

Dear Mr. Ryan:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United States Attorney for the District of
Massachusetts (“the U.S. Attorney”) and your client, Krystian Gubernat (“Defendant”), in the
above-referenced case. The Agreement is as follows:

1. Change of Plea

At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall waive indictment and plead guilty to the
Information attached to this Agreement charging him with: Armed Bank Robbery, in violation
of 18 U.S.C. §2113 (Counts Six and Eight); Interference with Commerce by Robbery, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. §1951 (Counts One through Five and Seven); Using, Carrying, and
Brandishing a Firearm in Furtherance of a Violent Felony, in violation of 18 U.S.C.§924(c)
(Count Nine); and Aiding and Abetting, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §2 (Counts One through Nine).
Defendant expressly and unequivocally admits that he committed the crimes charged in Counts
One through Nine of the Information, did so knowingly, intentionally and willfully, and is in fact
guilty of those offenses. Defendant also agrees to waive venue, to waive any applicable statute
of limitations, and to waive any legal or procedural defects in the Information.

The U.S. Attorney agrees not to charge Defendant with any additional counts of using,
carrying, and brandishing a firearm pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §924(c) in connection with the conduct
charged in Counts One through Five, Seven, and Eight of the Information.
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 2 of 11

2. Penalties

Defendant faces the following minimum mandatory and maximum penalties on each
count of the Information: as to each of Counts One through Five, and Count Seven, incarceration
for twenty years, supervised release for three years, a fine of $250,000, a mandatory special
assessment of $100, restitution, and forfeiture to the extent charged in the Information; as to each
of Counts Six and Eight, incarceration for up to twenty-five years, supervised release for five
years, a fine of $250,000, a mandatory special assessment of $100, restitution, and forfeiture to
the extent charged in the Information; and as to Count Nine, a mandatory minimum sentence of
incarceration for seven years up to a maximum of life that must be imposed consecutively to any
sentence imposed on the underlying crimes, supervised release for up to five years, a fine of up
to $250,000, a mandatory special assessment of $100, and forfeiture to the extent charged in the
Information.

Defendant also recognizes that pleading guilty may have consequences with respect to
Defendant’s immigration status if Defendant is not a citizen of the United States. Under federal
law, a broad range of crimes are removable offenses, including the offenses to which Defendant
is pleading guilty. Indeed, because Defendant is pleading guilty to Armed Bank Robbery,
Interference with Commerce by Robbery, and Using, Carrying and Brandishing a Firearm in the
Course of a Violent Felony, removal is presumptively mandatory. Removal and other
immigration consequences are the subject of a separate proceeding, however, and Defendant
understands that no one, including defense counsel and the District Court, can predict to a
certainty the effect of this conviction on Defendant’s immigration status. Defendant nevertheless
affirms his decision to plead guilty regardless of any immigration consequences that this plea
may entail, even if the consequence is Defendant’s automatic removal from the United States.

3, Sentencing Guidelines

The sentence to be imposed upon Defendant is within the discretion of the District Court
(“Court”), subject to the statutory mandatory minimum and maximum penalties set forth above
and the provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act, and the advisory United States Sentencing
Guidelines (“‘USSG” or “Guidelines”). While the Court may impose a sentence up to and
including the statutory maximum term of imprisonment and statutory maximum fine, it must
consult and take into account the USSG and the other factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a) in
imposing a sentence.

The U.S. Attorney will take the position that Defendant’s total offense level under the
USSG (prior to any adjustment for acceptance of responsibility) is calculated as follows:
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 3 of 11

i)
(il)

(i)
(ii)

(ii)

(i)
(ii)

(i)
(ii)

(i)
(ii)

Count One
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Two
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Three
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Four
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Five
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Six
in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(1), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 2, because the property of a financial institution was taken;
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 4 of 11

Count Seven
(i) in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

(ii) in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used;

Count Eight

G) in accordance with USSG §2B3.1, Defendant’s base offense level is 20;

(ii) in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(1), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 2, because the property of a financial institution was taken;

(iii) | in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B), Defendant’s offense level is
increased by 6, because a firearm was otherwise used; and

Count Nine

(i) in accordance with USSG §2K2.4(b), the Court must impose an 84-month
sentence consecutively to any other sentence imposed.

Defendant agrees with respect to the application of the USSG that the base offense level
is 20 for Counts One through Eight. Defendant further agrees that the base offense level is
increased by two levels in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(1) for Counts Six and Eight
because the property of a financial institution was taken. Defendant further agrees that the 84-
month mandatory minimum applies under Count Nine because a firearm was “brandished”
within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. §924(c)(1)(A)(ii). Defendant reserves the right to argue that the
base offense Jevel in Counts One through Eight should be increased by five levels in accordance
with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(C), rather than six levels in accordance with USSG §2B3.1(b)(2)(B).

The parties otherwise have no agreement as to the application of the USSG and reserve
all rights with respect to how the USSG apply to Defendant.

The U.S. Attorney reserves the right to seek an upward departure pursuant to USSG
§4A1.3 should any of Defendant’s prior convictions be vacated or Defendant’s Criminal History
Category otherwise change after Defendant’s guilty plea in this case.

In the event Defendant contends that there is a basis for departure from, or a sentence
outside, the otherwise applicable Guidelines sentencing range based on Defendant’s medical,
mental, and/or emotional condition, or otherwise intends to rely on any such condition at
sentencing, Defendant will, forthwith upon request, execute all releases and other documentation
necessary to permit the U.S. Attorney and her experts (including Bureau of Prisons medical
personnel) to obtain access to Defendant’s medical, psychiatric, and psychotherapeutic records
and will also provide to the U.S. Attorney forthwith copies of any such records already in

4
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 5 of 11

Defendant’s possession. In addition, Defendant will authorize Defendant’s care providers to
discuss Defendant’s condition with the U.S. Attorney and her agents (including Bureau of
Prisons medical personnel), as well as experts retained by the U.S. Attorney. Defendant also
agrees to submit to examinations and interviews with experts retained by and chosen by the U.S.
Attorney (including Bureau of Prisons medical personnel).

The U.S. Attorney reserves the right to oppose Defendant’s argument(s) for a departure
or a sentence outside the USSG under the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a).

Based on Defendant’s prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the offenses of
conviction in this case, and information known to the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S.
Attorney agrees to recommend that the Court reduce by three levels Defendant’s adjusted
offense level under USSG §3E1.1.

The U.S. Attorney reserves the right not to recommend a reduction under USSG §3E1.1
if, at any time between Defendant’s execution of this Agreement and sentencing, Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the plea;
(b) Fails to truthfully admit Defendant’s conduct in the offenses of conviction;

(c) Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant conduct for which
Defendant is accountable under USSG §1B1.3;

(d) Fails to provide truthful information about Defendant’s financial status;
(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any proceeding relating to the
criminal conduct charged in this case and any relevant conduct for which

Defendant is accountable under USSG §1B1.3;

(f) Engages in acts that form a basis for finding that Defendant has obstructed
or impeded the administration of justice under USSG §3C1.1;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates any condition of release;
(h) Commits a crime;
(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision of this Agreement; or
GQ) Attempts to withdraw Defendant’s guilty plea.
Defendant understands and acknowledges that Defendant may not withdraw his plea of
guilty if, for any of the reasons listed above, the U.S. Attorney does not recommend that
Defendant receive a reduction in offense level for acceptance of responsibility. Defendant also

understands and acknowledges that, in addition to declining to recommend an acceptance-of-
5
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 6 of 11

responsibility adjustment, the U.S. Attorney may seek an upward adjustment pursuant to USSG
§3C1.1 if Defendant obstructs justice after the date of this Agreement.

Nothing in this Agreement affects the U.S. Attorney’s obligation to provide the Court and
the U.S. Probation Office with accurate and complete information regarding this case.

4, Sentence Recommendation
The U.S. Attorney agrees to recommend the following sentence before the Court:

(a) 120 months’ imprisonment, which consists of a sentence of 36 months’
incarceration on each of Counts One through Eight, to be served
concurrently, and as to Count Nine, a sentence of 84 months to run
consecutively to the sentence imposed on Counts One through Eight;

(b) a fine within the Guidelines sentencing range as calculated by the Court at
sentencing, excluding departures, unless the Court finds that Defendant is
not able and, even with the use of a reasonable installment schedule, is not
likely to become able to pay a fine;

(c) 60 months of supervised release, which consists of a sentence of 60
months of supervised release on Count Nine, and a sentence of 36 months
of supervised release on each of Counts One through Eight, to be run
concurrently;

(d) | amandatory special assessment of $900;
(e) restitution as determined by the Court at sentencing; and
(f) forfeiture as set forth in Paragraph 9.

The Defendant agrees to recommend a sentence of not less than 96 months and may rely
on any departure and/or factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a) in support of that
recommendation.

Defendant agrees to provide the U.S. Attorney expert reports, motions, memoranda of
law and documentation of any kind on which Defendant intends to rely at sentencing not later
than 21 days before sentencing. Any basis for sentencing as to which Defendant has not
provided the U.S. Attorney all such items at least 21 days before sentencing shall be deemed
waived.

5. Payment of Mandatory Special Assessment

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to the Clerk of the Court on or
before the date of sentencing, unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that

6
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 7 of 11

Defendant is financially unable to do so.

6.

Waiver of Rights to Appeal and to Bring Future Challenge

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Defendant has conferred with his attorney and understands that he has the
right to challenge both his conviction and his sentence (including any
orders relating to supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and restitution) on
direct appeal. Defendant also understands that, in some circumstances,
Defendant may be able to argue in a future proceeding (collateral or
otherwise), such as pursuant to a motion under 28 U.S.C. §2255, 28
U.S.C. §2241, or 18 U.S.C. §3582(c), that Defendant’s conviction should
be set aside or Defendant’s sentence (including any orders relating to
supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and restitution) set aside or reduced.

Defendant waives any right to challenge Defendant’s conviction on direct
appeal or in a future proceeding (collateral or otherwise).

In exchange for the U.S. Attorney’s agreement not to file any additional
charges pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §924(c), Defendant agrees not to file a
direct appeal nor challenge in a future proceeding (collateral or otherwise)
Defendant’s sentence (including any orders relating to supervised release,
fines, forfeiture, and restitution).

This Agreement does not affect the rights of the United States as set forth
in 18 U.S.C. §3742(b). Defendant understands and acknowledges the U.S.
Attorney has retained all appeal rights.

Notwithstanding the previous sub-paragraphs, Defendant reserves the right
to claim that Defendant’s lawyer rendered ineffective assistance of
counsel under Strickland v. Washington.

Other Post-Sentence Events

(a)

(b)

In the event that, notwithstanding the waiver provision of sub-paragraph
6(c), Defendant appeals or challenges in a future proceeding (collateral or
otherwise) Defendant’s sentence, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to
argue the correctness of the sentence imposed by the Court (in addition to
arguing that any appeal or future challenge (collateral or otherwise) is
waived as a result of the waiver in sub-paragraph 6(c)).

If, notwithstanding the waiver provision of sub-paragraph 6(c), Defendant

seeks re-sentencing, Defendant agrees not to seek to be re-sentenced with

the benefit of any change to the Criminal History Category that the Court

calculated at the time of Defendant’s original sentencing, except to the

extent that Defendant has been found actually factually innocent of a prior
7
.

Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 8 of 11

crime.

(c) In the event of a re-sentencing following an appeal from or future
challenge (collateral or otherwise) to Defendant’s sentence, the U.S.
Attorney reserves the right to seek a departure from and a sentence outside
the USSG if, and to the extent, necessary to reinstate the sentence the U.S.
Attorney advocated at Defendant’s initial sentencing pursuant to this
Agreement.

8. Court Not Bound by Agreement

The parties’ sentencing recommendations and their respective calculations under the
USSG are not binding upon the U.S. Probation Office or the Court. Within the mandatory
minimum and maximum sentence Defendant faces under the applicable law, the sentence to be
imposed is within the sole discretion of the Court. Defendant’s plea will be tendered pursuant 'to
Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(1)(B). Defendant may not withdraw his plea of guilty regardless of what
sentence is imposed, or because the U.S. Probation Office or the Court declines to follow the
parties’ USSG calculations or recommendations. Should the Court decline to follow the U.S.
Attorney’s USSG calculations or recommendations, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to
defend the Court’s calculations and sentence in any direct appeal or future challenge (collateral
or otherwise).

9. Forfeiture

Defendant hereby waives and releases any claims Defendant may have to any vehicles,
currency, or other personal property seized by the United States, or seized by any state or local
law enforcement agency and turned over to the United States, during the investigation and
prosecution of this case, and consents to the forfeiture of all such assets. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, Defendant hereby specifically waives and releases Defendant’s
claims to one .45 caliber Glock semi-automatic pistol and ammunition seized by law
enforcement officials on November 26, 2013.

10. Civil Liability

By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not compromise any civil
liability, including but not limited to any tax liability, Defendant may have incurred or may incur
as a result of Defendant’s conduct and plea of guilty to the charges specified in Paragraph 1 of
this Agreement.

11. Rejection of Plea by Court

Should Defendant’s guilty plea not be accepted by the Court for whatever reason, or later
be withdrawn on Defendant’s motion, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the
U.S. Attorney.
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 9 of 11

12. Breach of Agreement

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to comply with any provision of
this Agreement, has violated any condition of Defendant’s pretrial release, or has committed any
crime following Defendant’s execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may, at her sole
option, be released from her commitments under this Agreement in their entirety by notifying
Defendant, through counsel or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also pursue all
remedies available to her under the law, regardless whether she elects to be released from her
commitments under this Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and all charges
that have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this Agreement. Defendant recognizes that his
breach of any obligation under this Agreement shall not give rise to grounds for withdrawal of
Defendant’s guilty plea, but will give the U.S. Attorney the right to use against Defendant before
any grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes, any statements that Defendant
may make, and any information, materials, documents or objects that Defendant may provide to
the government subsequent to this Agreement, or pursuant to any prior written agreement,
without any limitation. In this regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges that
Defendant might otherwise have based upon any statute of limitations, the constitutional
protection against pre-indictment delay, or the Speedy Trial Act.

13. Who Is Bound By Agreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts, and
cannot and does not bind the Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state or
local prosecutive authorities.

14. Complete Agreement .

This letter contains the complete and only agreement between the parties relating to the
disposition of this case. No promises, representations or agreements have been made other than
those set forth in this letter and in any prior written agreement. This Agreement supersedes prior
understandings, if any, of the parties, whether written or oral, with the sole exception of those
contained in any prior written agreement (subject to Paragraph 12, above). This Agreement can
be modified or supplemented only in a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the
record in court.
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 10 of 11

If this letter accurately reflects the agreement between the U.S. Attorney and Defendant,
please have Defendant sign the Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below
as Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S. Attorney Mark J. Grady.

10

Very truly yours,

CARMEN M. ORTIZ
United States Attorney

~

 

CYNTHIA/A. YOUNG /

Chief, Criminal Division
JAMES D. HERBERT

Deputy Chief, Criminal Division
Case 4:15-cr-40006-TSH Document 24 Filed 03/04/15 Page 11 of 11

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

I have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it with my attorney. I hereby
acknowledge that it fully sets forth my agreement with the United States Attorney’s Office for
the District of Massachusetts. I further state that no additional promises or representations have
been made to me by any official of the United States in connection with this matter, and that I
received an offer by letter dated August 20, 2014 and rejected that offer. I understand the crimes
to which I have agreed to plead guilty, the mandatory minimum and maximum penalties for
those offenses and Sentencing Guideline penalties potentially applicable to them. I am satisfied
with the legal representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had sufficient time to
meet and discuss my case. We have discussed the charges against me, possible defenses I might
have, the terms of this Plea Agreement and whether I should go to trial. I am entering into this
Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly because I am guilty of the offenses to which I am
pleading guilty and I believe this Agreement is in my best interest.

Kryst#an Gubernat
Defendant

Date: [-24 AIS

I certify that Krystian Gubernat has read this Agreement and that we have discussed its
meaning. I believe he understands the Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely,
voluntarily and knowingly. I also certify that, in addition to this offer, the U.S. Attorney
extended an offer dated August 20, 2014 and that I fully discussed that offer with Defendant

before Defendant rejected it. _ |
C 4 Wu 0) . NA

Edward P. Ryan, Jr., Esq.
Attorney for Defendant

co
Date: t\24 iS

11
