      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 1 of 16



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA          )
                                  )
     v.                           )       Criminal No. 19-10219-LTS
DANIEL ROSADO,                    )
     Defendant.                   )

                  GOVERNMENT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

     The United States submits this Sentencing Memorandum in the

above-captioned case, currently scheduled for sentencing on

September 21, 2020.    For the reasons outlined in this

memorandum, the Government believes that a sentence of 225

months’ imprisonment, the high-end of the guidelines, is the

appropriate sentence in this matter.        Following the completion

of this sentence, the Government requests that the defendant be

on supervised release for a period of 60 months, and be required

to pay a mandatory special assessment of $300.

I.   PROCEDURAL HISTORY

     On May 24, 2020 , Daniel Rosado (“Rosado”) pled guilty to a

three-count indictment charging him with: Count One-armed bank

robbery in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2113(a) and (d); Count Two-

being a previously convicted felon in possession of a firearm and

ammunition, in violation of 18 U.S.C.§ 922(g)(1); and Count

Three-discharging a firearm during the commission of a crime of

violence, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(C)(1)(a)




                                      1
       Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 2 of 16



and(iii). Rosado is currently in the custody of the United States

Marshal.

II.   THE OFFENSE CONDUCT

      The facts, as stated in the Presentence Investigation

Report (“PSR”), are largely uncontested.

      A. The Robbery

      On May 1, 2019, at approximately 10:00 a.m., an individual,

later identified as Rosado entered a branch of the Middlesex

Federal Savings Bank (“the Bank”).        Upon entering the Bank

Rosado withdrew a firearm, pointed the firearm at the Bank’s

employees and customers, and then fired one round into the

Bank’s ceiling.    Witnesses inside the Bank recalled hearing

Rosado say, prior to discharging the firearm, words to the

effect, “get down, everybody on the ground, give me the money or

I will shoot.”    In response to Rosado’s action and his

statements, employees and customers went to the ground.           Rosado

then threw a backpack at a Bank employee and made an additional

verbal demand for the Bank’s money.        The employee complied with

Rosado’s demands, removed currency from her cash drawer, and

placed the currency in Rosado’s backpack.

      A Bank customer, who had been inside the Bank at the time

of the robbery, exited the Bank, flagged down a uniformed

Somerville Police Officer (“the Officer”), and informed the

Officer of the robbery inside the Bank.

                                     2
         Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 3 of 16



     The Officer entered the Bank, removed his firearm, pointed

his firearm at Rosado and ordered him to freeze.            In response,

Rosado turned toward the Officer and fired his weapon directly

at the Officer.      The Officer then fired three rounds at Rosado, 1

who then with the backpack containing the Bank’s currency,

exited the Bank onto College Avenue with the Officer in pursuit.

     Once on College Avenue, a witness known to the Government,

observed the Officer chasing Rosado, and attempted to tackle

Rosado.     The witness was unable to tackle Rosado but his attempt

resulted in Rosado dropping the backpack.           The Officer gave

chase but was unable to catch and arrest Rosado.

     The backpack was later secured by law enforcement and found

to contain a .38 caliber Webley Mark IV six-shot revolver, 2 $929

in US currency, 3 and other items to include a cloudy glass pipe.

     B. The Identification and Arrest of Rosado

     The Bank’s surveillance cameras were functioning and

operating on the date of the robbery and captured images of


     1 A video of the robbery and the interaction between Rosado
and the Officer has been provided to the defendant in discovery
and to the United States Probation Officer responsible for
writing this PSR, and will be made available to the Court at
sentencing.
     2 The revolver (a six shot) contained 2 spent casings, 3
intact rounds, and 1 intact round with a dimpled primer.
     3 A post-robbery audit determined that the Bank had lost
$929 during the robbery.

                                       3
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 4 of 16



Rosado entering the Bank, pointing a firearm at the Bank’s

employees and customers, firing a round into the Bank’s ceiling

and pointing and firing a round in the direction of the Officer.

     The backpack seized by law enforcement was submitted for

forensic analysis and determined to contain genetic material

belonging to Rosado.    Based on this discovery Rosado’s picture

was later placed in a photo array and presented to a Bank

employee who positively identified Rosado as the robber.

     In the Bank, two spent projectiles attributable to Rosado’s

firearm discharge were later tested and determined to have been

fired by the revolver recovered from the backpack carried by and

later abandoned by Rosado.     One of the projectiles, determined

to have been fired by Rosado’s firearm, was in area where Rosado

had fired into the Bank’s ceiling, the other was in the area

where the Officer entered the Bank. Three additional projectiles

were recovered and determined to have been discharged from the

firearm used by the Officer.

     On May 22, 2019, following a period of investigation,

Rosado was located and arrested.        Rosado was booked and later

agreed to an interview, which was both video and audio recorded.

During the interview, Rosado admitted to the robbery, firing his

firearm into the Bank’s ceiling, and to firing his firearm in

the direction of the Officer in an attempt to “scare him,” and

expressed concern if his bullet struck the Officer. Rosado

                                    4
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 5 of 16



stated that he wore gloves and a sweater to hide his tattoos.

Rosado stated that following the robbery he returned to work and

discarded the clothing he was wearing during the robbery.

Rosado stated that law enforcement approached him following the

robbery and asked if he saw or knew anything about the robbery,

which he denied.   Rosado went on to state that he had purchased

the firearm from an unknown male in 2018 in Rhode Island.

     Following Rosado’s arrest, law enforcement interviewed

Rosado’s girlfriend (“SM”) who stated that she had received a

series of text messages from Rosado on the day of the robbery.

In these texts Rosado stated:

          27 college st
          Please emergency
          I fucked up
          I’m sorry
          I love u tho 4 Eva


     SM stated that prior to the robbery Rosado had purchased

women’s cosmetic/concealer makeup and was applying it to his

arms and hands to cover up a series of tattoos.         Finally, SM was

shown a picture of the robbery and positively identified Rosado

as the individual robbing the Bank.




                                    5
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 6 of 16



III. GUIDELINE ANALYSIS

     A. Offense Level Computation

     ¶¶ 35 and 36

     The government agrees with Probation that Counts 1 and 2

are grouped together for guideline calculation purposes, and

that the calculation for Count 1 is higher than Count 2.

     ¶¶ 37 and 38

     The government agrees with Probation that the Base Offense

Level for armed bank robbery is 20, and that the Base Offense

Level is increased by 2 because property of a financial

institution (Middlesex Federal Savings Bank) was the subject of

the robbery.

     ¶ 39

     The government agrees with Probation that the defendant’s

actions created a substantial risk of serious bodily harm to a

law enforcement officer, during the course of the offense or

immediate flight, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe

that said person was a law enforcement officer.         Accordingly,

the Base Offense Level should be increased 6-levels.

     ¶ 42

     The government agrees with Probation that Rosado’s Adjusted

Offense level is 28.




                                    6
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 7 of 16



     ¶¶ 44, 45 and 46

     The government agrees with Probation that, with acceptance

of responsibility the Adjusted Offense Level is reduced by 3-

levels, which results in a Total Offense Level of 25.

   B. The Defendant’s Criminal History

     ¶¶ 60 and 61

     The Government agrees with Probation’s conclusions that the

defendant’s criminal convictions results in a Criminal History

score of 9, and that a Criminal History score of 9 establishes a

Criminal History Category of IV.

    C. Sentencing Options

     ¶ 112 Guideline Provisions

     The Government further agrees with Probation that with a

Total Offense Level of 25, and a Criminal History score of IV,

Rosado’s guideline imprisonment range is 84 to 105 months.

Furthermore, that Count Three requires a 120-month term of

imprisonment which shall be imposed consecutive to any other

term of imprisonment, establishing an effective guideline

imprisonment range of 204 to 225 months’ imprisonment.

     IV. SENTENCING RECOMMENDATION

     18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) requires a sentencing court to consider

specific enumerated factors when determining an appropriate

sentence.   These factors include: 1) the nature and

circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics

                                    7
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 8 of 16



of the defendant and 2) the need for the sentence imposed to

reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for

the law, to provide just punishment for the offense, to afford

adequate deterrence to criminal conduct, to protect the public

from further crimes of the defendant, and to provide for the

needs of the defendant.

     A.   Rosado’s Lengthy Record of Criminal Convictions and
          Criminal Behavior

     Rosado has a lengthy record of criminal arrests and

convictions commencing in 2006.      According to the PSR, Rosado

has been arrested on 18 separate occasions and convicted of

these offenses on 10 separate occasions.        These convictions

include multiple counts of receiving stolen motor vehicles

(¶¶ 50,51 and 52), vandalism, motor vehicle violations, drug

offenses, breaking and entry (¶¶ 56 and 58), threats and assault

with a dangerous weapon (hammer).       In 2012, Rosado was charged

with negligent operation of a motor vehicle.        This incident,

which is not contested in the PSR, involved Rosado being

involved in a high-speed auto chase and crash which resulted in

four individuals being injured and requiring med-flight to

Boston hospitals.    Witnesses to the incident described Rosado as

the driver of one of the vehicles and that he caused the

accident by slamming into another vehicle. (PSR ¶ 59).          Rosado

has been sentenced on two occasions with prison terms ranging


                                    8
      Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 9 of 16



from six months to two years. In many of his cases Rosado has

been in violation of his terms of probation.

     The Government would note, that Rosado was arrested on

eight separate dates which resulted in charges being dismissed

(PSR ¶ ¶ 64-71), and that four of those dismissed charges

involve allegations of threats or assault and battery.

     According to the PSR, between 2007 and 2012, Rosado has

been a defendant in five domestic restraining orders.          While

classified under Massachusetts law as civil, these restraining

order reflect violent criminal behavior, and an unwillingness to

conform his behavior and correspond to criminal charges being

levied against him (PSR ¶¶ 89-93).

     The defendant’s personal history shows that he successfully

completed high school and vocational school without issues. PSR

¶ 100. Up until the instant offense and but for periods of

incarceration, he maintained gainful employment for many years

as a welder and cell tower technician. PSR ¶¶ 102-106. While he

self-reported metal health and substance abuse issues, none were

verified by probation.    PSR ¶¶ 97-99. Despite a self-reported,

and uncorroborated, difficult upbringing, the defendant’s

background and personal history shows that he is capable of

distinguishing right from wrong. Thus, he understood the impact

that his violent crime had on the victims, including the bank



                                    9
     Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 10 of 16



customers, bank employees, law enforcement officers and

community.

     B.      The Instant Offense

     On the date of the instant offense, Rosado, armed with a

firearm, violently robbed a branch of the Middlesex Federal

Savings Bank and discharged his firearm on two separate

occasions – once in the ceiling to instill fear in the bank

customers and employees and then in the direction of a uniformed

Somerville Police Department officer.       The Government maintains

that this was not a random act but rather a pre-planned event.

On the day of the robbery, Rosado brought a loaded gun and a

change of clothes with him to work. Prior to the robbery, Rosado

covered his tattoos with gloves, recently purchased makeup

concealer and a sweatshirt to avoid detection.        Following the

robbery, Rosado deliberately tried to avoid detection when he

discarded his clothes in an incinerator in a nearby building and

went up to the roof the building to work on it as a cell tower

technician. When confronted by an officer who responded to

investigate the robbery, Rosado denied even knowing it had

occurred. During the robbery, Rosado entered the Bank,

brandished a firearm, pointed the firearm at Bank employees and

customers and ordered everyone to the ground.        For further

effect, and to reinforce his violent intentions, Rosado then

fired a shot into the Bank’s ceiling causing terror and

                                   10
     Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 11 of 16



commotion among the Bank’s employees and customers. The

responding Officer, in full uniform, entered the Bank, withdrew

his own firearm and ordered Rosado to freeze.        Rosado, instead

of complying with the Officer’s commands escalated the situation

by firing a shot at the Officer, endangering not only the

Officer’s life, but potentially others inside and outside the

Bank. Rosado left the Officer with no choice but to return fire

potentially endangering Rosado’s life or any other individuals

inside and outside the Bank.     Rosado then exited the Bank with

the Bank’s money and his firearm and a chase ensued.

     C. Victim Impact

     The victim impact statements regarding the events of May 1,

2019 have been provided by the Government to Probation, Defense,

and Court.    Despite the pandemic we are suffering, a number of

these victims plan on appearing in open Court and presenting

testimony during Rosado’s sentencing hearing on Monday September

21, 2020.    These victims’ statements have echoed, in summary,

the impact Rosado’s senseless and violent actions have had on

them personally and the impact on their families.

     The aftermath of the robbery left many unable to fully

recount their horrific experiences to the Court through written

victim impact statements. In the weeks following the robbery,

many of the Bank’s employees, who were in the Middlesex Federal

Bank, in their own words, suffered from restless nights and had

                                   11
     Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 12 of 16



trouble concentrating, eating, and carrying on the basic

functions of daily life. They repeatedly replayed the events of

May 1, 2019, which inflicted constant anxiety, manifesting

itself in being cautious of others and being hyperaware of their

surroundings. Those who were able to escape during the robbery

had difficulty exiting the building, which caused extreme levels

of anxiety.   Horrible memories lingered. During the robbery,

many of the employees, who were parents, thought about what

would happen if they did not make it home and left their

children without a parent. One victim thought of her daughter

and realized she might not live to see her walk down the aisle

at her wedding the upcoming weekend. When the Bank’s employees

came back to work, many of them feared that Rosado would come

back to harm them. Children begged their parents, a number of

them single mothers, not to go back to work, for fear they would

never see them again. The employees’ children suffered from

constant fear and worry. The press coverage forced the victims

to relive the trauma. The disruption to daily work also impacted

the bank’s operations as a whole and negatively impacted

productivity. The events of that day were terrifying, and

everyone who witnessed it has been able to handle it in ways

that are comfortable for them. They have stated that no amount

of therapy, repairs, security changes, or time, however, will

ever change or heal the damage that Rosado inflicted. One victim

                                   12
     Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 13 of 16



stated, in substance, that Rosado stole a sense of safety and

security from the Bank’s employees and their families. Finally,

another victim concluded that there will always be a part of

each employee that is broken, because of Rosado.

     The responding Somerville Officer has also indicated a

desire to appear at sentencing and address the Court and explain

the impact Rosado’s senseless actions had on him, his family,

and on the Somerville Police Department.       Rosado’s actions

placed the Officer the Bank’s employees, and its customers, in a

life-threatening situation and forced the Officer to make a

split-second decision potentially endangering both Rosado’s life

and others.

     D.   Other 18 U.S.C. § 3553 Factors

     The Government believes that during Rosado’s anticipated

period of imprisonment, he should avail himself of what appears

to be much need counseling to address drug and alcohol issues.

Additionally, Rosado will have the opportunity to address any

mental health issues through available programs and counseling.

     V.    CONCLUSION

     No one should fear doing every day, basic errands, like

going to the bank. Nor should anyone fear working in one. But,

on May 1, 2019, Rosado callously threatened the lives of

innocent people who were doing just that. He did not just

brandish but instead fired a weapon twice and etched a permanent

                                   13
            Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 14 of 16



fear in the minds of and endangered the lives of bank customers,

bank tellers and the community surrounding Davis Square in

Somerville. The only reason for doing so was in response to his

own greed, selfishness and frustrations with personal issues.

        Rosado actions in entering the Bank and assaulting Bank

employees and customers with his firearm, and discharging his

firearm in the Bank at the responding Somerville Officer are

outrageous and cannot be treated lightly.              Rosado has a lengthy

criminal record and has demonstrated a refusal to conform his

behavior to acceptable societal norms.              This behavior cannot and

should not continue. The Government is well within its rights to

demand a maximum sentence of 35 years’ imprisonment 4 for the bank

robbery and the discharging of the firearm.               The Government

however, for the reasons stated herein, requests this Court

impose a sentence at the high-end of the advisory guideline

range of 225 months’ imprisonment. Following completion of this

sentence, the Government requests that Rosado be placed on

Supervised Release for the statutory maximum period of 5 years,

and a be ordered to pay a mandatory special assessment fee of

$300.




        4
       The robbery of the bank carries a maximum penalty of 25
years’ imprisonment to be followed by a consecutive term of 10
years due to the discharge of the firearm.

                                          14
     Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 15 of 16



     This is a just and appropriate sentence as dictated by

Rosado’s own senseless and violent actions on the morning of May

1, 2019, and by Rosado’s own decisions throughout his lifetime.

This type of sentence sends a clear message that this type of

violent criminal behavior cannot and will not be accepted.

                                 Respectfully submitted,

                                 ANDREW E. LELLING
                                 United States Attorney

                           By:   /s/ Kenneth G. Shine
                                 KENNETH G. SHINE
                                 LINDSEY E. WEINSTEIN
                                 Assistant U.S. Attorneys


                     CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

     I, the undersigned, hereby certify that this document filed

through the ECF system will be sent electronically to the

registered participants as identified on the Notice of

Electronic Filing (NEF).



                                 /s/ Kenneth G. Shine
                                 KENNETH G. SHINE
                                 Assistant U.S. Attorney




                                   15
Case 1:19-cr-10219-LTS Document 69 Filed 09/16/20 Page 16 of 16




                              16
