                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                      )
                                              )
               v.                             )      No. 1:18-cr-10372-FDS
                                              )
DAVID AMADIN,                                 )
                                              )
               Defendant.                     )

              GOVERNMENT’S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANT’S
       MOTION FOR COMPASSIONATE RELEASE FROM INCARCERATION

       The United States of America, through counsel, submits this opposition to Defendant’s

Motion for Compassionate Release under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) (“Defendant’s Motion”), Dkt.

No. 63.    Although sympathetic to concerns pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic, the

Government opposes Amadin’s motion for immediate release.

       First, Amadin is a relatively healthy 29-year-old male. Although Amadin complains that

he suffers from “anxiety, depression, insomnia, and violent nightmares,” Def.’s Mot. at 1, none of

those conditions constitute an “extraordinary and compelling reason” sufficient to warrant

modification of his sentence pursuant to § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i), contrary to Defendant’s argument.

       Second, the Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) has taken extensive measures in light of the

COVID-19 pandemic to mitigate the spread of infection. The current COVID-19 infection

statistics reported by FCI-Berlin suggest that the institution has been successful in containing and

mitigating the spread of the virus.

       Third, even if Amadin were able to satisfy the “extraordinary and compelling reason”

threshold necessary to consider compassionate release, the balance of the remaining factors set

forth in § 3553(a) weigh strongly against his release. Amadin stands convicted of Felon in

Possession of Firearm and Ammunition, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Furthermore,
PATTERN indicated that his risk of recidivism is high. Def.’s Exhibit 2 at 3. Therefore, Amadin’s

prior criminal conduct suggests that he would present an unacceptable risk of danger and non-

compliance were Amadin to be released.

       Finally, Amadin has served less than half of 63-month sentence that he received pursuant

to his plea agreement with the government. Amadin is currently scheduled to be released in late

2023, which includes credit for good time. Given the seriousness of Amadin’s prior criminal

history, his release would present an untenable risk of danger to the community and would not be

“consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” 18 U.S.C.

§ 3582(c)(1)(A). It would also send precisely the wrong message to the community concerning

the seriousness of Amadin’s prior illegal conduct and gang affiliation.

       For all of these reasons, this Court should deny Amadin’s motion for release.

                                      I.   BACKGROUND

       On July 8, 2018, two plain-clothes officers with the Boston Police Department’s Youth

Violence Strike Force, Jeff Connolly and Connor Hardy, were patrolling the Mattapan

neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts. Presentence Investigation Report (“PSR”) ¶ 8. While

driving in their unmarked car, they heard three gunshots coming from the Roberts Playground

area. PSR ¶ 9. The officers turned their car around and proceeded toward the Playground. PSR

¶¶ 9-10. Upon arriving at 46 Torrey Street, they noticed an African American male appear from

nearby bushes and begin walking in the officer’s direction. PSR ¶ 10. The officers then recognized

the male as David Amadin, whom they knew to be an affiliated with the Annuciation Road Gang

and whom they knew had a long arrest log that included firearms offenses. PSR ¶ 10. Noticing

what appeared to be a firearm in Amadin’s waistband, the officers exited their vehicle and called

out to Amadin in hopes of speaking with him. PSR ¶¶ 10-12.



                                                2
       Upon calling out to him, Amadin immediately began to run away from the officers. PSR

¶ 12. The officers chased after him. PSR ¶ 12. While doing so, they noticed him holding

something against his waistband with his right hand and only pumping with his left arm. PSR ¶¶

12-13. This behavior was consistent for most of the chase, until Officer Hardy noticed Amadin

make a throwing motion with his right hand as they ran through the backyard of 46 Torrey Street.

PSR ¶ 14. At this moment, Officer Hardy noticed “a black object” moving through the air toward

the direction of a one-story-garage roof and, shortly thereafter, “heard the object make a distinct

thud upon landing.” PSR ¶ 14. Immediately after Amadin threw the object, he surrendered, and

was secured. PSR ¶¶ 14-15.

       Upon returning to the scene, Officer Hardy and Sergeant Patrick Browning located the

firearm. PSR ¶ 15. It was on the roof of a garage, which had dirt and moss on its surface. PSR ¶

15. When they retrieved the firearm, they noticed that the weapon “had moss in its muzzle.” PSR

¶ 15. Officer Hardy later inquired as to whether Amadin had a license to carry. PSR ¶ 16. When

he did so, “Amadin laughed.” PSR ¶ 16.

       Officers also located an automobile registered to Amadin’s grandfather that was parked

nearby. PSR ¶ 17. The Acura TL was running, and, in plain view, had “substantial amounts of

cash spread around the front seat.” PSR ¶ 17. Amadin later confirmed that the funds were his.

PSR ¶ 17.

       On April 23, 2019, David Amadin plead guilty to Felon in Possession of Firearm and

Ammunition, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) (Count 1). PSR ¶ 2. Pursuant to the plea

agreement, the parties agreed on a sentence of 63 months’ imprisonment, with three years of

supervised release, and a fine within the applicable guideline range, which the Court imposed. To




                                                3
date, Amadin has served less than half of the total sentence. With credit for good time, he will be

released in late 2023.

                         II.   APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

       Section 3582(c) begins with the principle that “a court may not modify a term of

imprisonment once it has been imposed.” 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c); see Dillon v. United States, 560

U.S. 817, 824-25 (2010). “[T]here is no ‘inherent authority’ for a district court to modify a

sentence as it pleases; indeed a district court’s discretion to modify a sentence is an exception to

[§ 3582’s] general rule” barring modification. United States v. Cunningham, 554 F.3d 703, 708

(7th Cir. 2009); cf. United States v. Goodwyn, 596 F.3d 233, 235 (4th Cir. 2010) (noting that 18

U.S.C. § 3582(b) “states that a district court may not modify a term of imprisonment once it has

been imposed unless the Bureau of Prisons moves for a reduction, the Sentencing Commission

amends the applicable Guidelines range, or another statute or Rule 35 expressly permits the court

to do so”).

       Section 3582(c)(1)(A) represents an exception to this general rule. The statute, adopted

as part of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, originally permitted judicial relief only upon a

motion by the BOP Director. The provision was amended by Section 603(b) of the First Step

Act, effective December 21, 2018. Under the statute as amended, a court may now consider a

defendant’s motion for compassionate release following the exhaustion of his or her

administrative remedies with the BOP or 30 days after submitting a request to the appropriate

Warden, whichever is sooner. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) (emphasis added). The First Step Act

did not amend the eligibility requirements for compassionate release, which are set forth in 18

U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) and Section 1B1.13 of the United States Sentencing Guidelines.

       A.      The Extraordinary and Compelling Reason Requirement



                                                  4
       The defendant bears the burden of proving that he is entitled to relief under 18 U.S.C.

§ 3582. See United States v. Butler, 970 F.2d 1017, 1026 (2d Cir. 1992) (“If the defendant seeks

decreased punishment, he or she has the burden of showing that the circumstances warrant that

decrease); cf. United States v. Hamilton, 715 F.3d 328, 337 (11th Cir. 2013) (“[A] defendant, as

the § 3582(c)(2) movant, bears the burden of establishing that a retroactive amendment has actually

lowered his guidelines range in his case.”).

       Once satisfying the threshold precondition of waiting 30 days following the receipt of the

defendant’s request to the warden, 1 the court may modify a sentence only if, “after considering the

factors set forth in section 3553(a) to the extent they are applicable,” it finds that “extraordinary

and compelling reasons warrant such a reduction,” 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)(i). 2 The proposed

reduction must be “consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing

Commission.” 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A).

       The Application Notes to Section 1B1.13 describe the circumstances under which

“extraordinary and compelling reasons exist.” U.S.S.G. § 1B1.13 Application Note 1. The first

of addresses defendants suffering from terminal illnesses and advanced illnesses that reduce life

expectancy such as advanced dementia. Id. at App. Note 1(A)(i). Also within Note 1(A) are

defendants suffering from other serious illnesses, such as a serious functional or cognitive

impairment, or deteriorating mental health because of the aging process. 3 Id. at App. Note 1(A)(ii).

Each medical condition in this Section “substantially diminishes the ability of the defendant to


       1
           Amadin has satisfied this requirement.
       2
        Section 3582(c)(1)(A)(ii) provides other bases by which a defendant may be eligible for
compassionate release; however, none of these factors are applicable in this case.
       3
         “Age of the Defendant” is also an extraordinary and compelling reason. However,
because Amadin is under 65, this factor is not applicable. See App. Note 1(A)(ii).


                                                    5
provide self-care within the environment of a correctional facility and from which he or she is not

expected to recover.” Id. at App. Note 1 (emphasis added).

       Also of relevance is Application Note 1(C), which addresses family circumstances. These

circumstances qualify as extraordinary and compelling reasons in only two specific instances:

“The death or incapacitation of . . . the defendant’s minor child or children” or “[t]he incapacitation

of the defendant’s spouse when defendant would be the only available caregiver for the spouse or

registered partner.” Id. at App. Note 1(C).

       Additionally, Application Note 1(D) permits the court to reduce a sentence where, “[a]s

determined by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, there exists in the defendant’s case an

extraordinary and compelling reason other than, or in combination with, the reasons described in

subdivisions (A) through (C).”        Id. at App. Note 1(D).      Accordingly, a court may grant

compassionate release not only on grounds specified by the Sentencing Commission, but also those

set forth in the relevant BOP regulation governing compassionate release.

       That regulation appears at BOP Program Statement 5050.50.             This program statement

took effect on January 17, 2019, following passage of the First Step Act, and contains standards

that are both more extensive than and slightly different from those stated in the § 1B1.13 Policy

Statement. As is relevant here, the Program Statement defines a “debilitated medical condition”

as follows:

       Debilitated Medical Condition. RIS 4 consideration may also be given to inmates
       who have an incurable, progressive illness or who have suffered a debilitating
       injury from which they will not recover. The BOP should consider a RIS if the
       inmate is:

              •   Completely disabled, meaning the inmate cannot carry on any self-care and
                  is totally confined to a bed or chair; or

       4
           RIS refers to a “reduction in sentence.” Program Statement 5050.50 at 4.


                                                  6
            •   Capable of only limited self-care and is confined to a bed or chair more than
                50% of waking hours.

       The BOP’s review should also include any cognitive deficits of the inmate (e.g.,
       Alzheimer’s disease or traumatic brain injury that has affected the inmate’s mental
       capacity or function). A cognitive deficit is not required in cases of severe physical
       impairment, but may be a factor when considering the inmate’s ability or inability
       to reoffend.

Program Statement 5050.50 at 5. 5

       Even when an extraordinary and compelling reason exists, however, a court should only

grant a motion for release if it determines that the defendant is not a danger to the public. USSG

§ 1B1.13(2). And, the court must consider, in general, whether the § 3553(a) factors weigh in

favor of release. See 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A); USSG § 1B1.13.

       B.       BOP’s Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic

       The COVID-19 pandemic has presented an unprecedented risk to the worldwide

community, including to individuals and staff at jails and prisons. It is a highly contagious virus

about which little was known when it first emerged in the United States. Thereafter, public health

officials at the local, state, and national levels have continuously sought to provide guidance as to

the best measures to prevent and/or limit the spread of the virus.

       The BOP has begun administering vaccines to inmates under guidance from the CDC. The

vaccine has been delivered to staff and inmates at more than half of the BOP’s correctional



       5
         As noted, the Program Statement’s provisions regarding the class of inmates eligible for
compassionate release is slightly different from the related provision in Section 1B1.13. To the
extent that the Program Statement and the Policy Statement conflict, it is the Policy Statement in
Section 1B1.13–i.e., the source directly authorized by statute–that is binding. An interpretation in
the Program Statement that does not contradict the Policy Statement, however, is entitled to some
weight. See Reno v. Koray, 515 U.S. 50, 61 (1995) (BOP program statements, which do not require
notice and comment, are entitled to “some deference” where they reflect a “permissible
construction of the statute”) (internal quotation marks omitted).


                                                  7
facilities and all of the BOP’s facilities are expected to receive their first dose by mid-February.

According to data from the CDC, as of January 15, 2021, the BOP leads all jurisdictions and

Federal entities in its rate of vaccination utilization, having administered 97% of all vaccine doses

received. As of January 15, 2021, the BOP administered 17,189 doses of the vaccine, with one

dose administered to 7,576 staff and 5,457 inmates and a completed series of two doses to 1,027

staff              and                 1,051                inmates.                             See

https://www.bop.gobopv/resources/news/20210116_covid_vaccine_efforts_commended.jsp (last

visited February 8, 2021).

        Outside the vaccine, the BOP, after consultation with public health officials, including at

the Centers for Disease Control (“CDC”), has aggressively implemented a series of policies and

procedures designed to prevent and/or mitigate the spread of COVID-19 within its facilities. With

time and as health experts learn more about the virus, the BOP has continued to refine and

implement additional comprehensive procedures relating to screening, testing, treatment,

prevention, education and infection control.

        The policies and procedures implemented by the BOP have come in various stages, referred

to as “Phase I” through “Phase IX.” Since March 2020, the BOP began taking extensive measures

to modify their operations in an effort to increase social distancing among staff and inmates and

to reduce the risk and spread of COVID-19.             More specifically, these measures include

suspension/modification of social visits and tours, restriction of inmate movement inside and

outside of the facilities, health screens and testing of staff and inmates.

        In a further step to limit the spread of COVID-19 within the BOP’s facilities and decrease

its prison population while protecting the general public, the BOP has engaged in an additional

step of identifying and designating appropriate inmates for transfer from each of the BOP’s



                                                   8
facilities nationwide to extended home confinement. This initiative was based upon the Attorney

General’s expanded authority pursuant to § 12003(b)(2) of the CARES Act, which lengthened the

amount of time that the Attorney General may place an inmate in home confinement pursuant to

18 U.S.C. § 3624(c)(2). Pursuant to this initiative, staff at each institution are reviewing each

inmate’s medical history to determine whether he or she is at increased risk based upon age and

vulnerability. The inmate is then assessed upon various other criteria (including, but not limited

to, violence or gang-related activity in prison or disciplinary misconduct at BOP within the past

year; risk of recidivism; presentation of a demonstrated and verifiable reentry plan that will prevent

recidivism and maximum public safety; verification that the release plan would present a lower

risk of contracting COVID-19 than the inmate would face in his or her BOP facility; and the

inmate’s offense of conviction and the assessment of danger posed by the inmate to the

community). 6     Should the staff recommend home confinement is appropriate, that

recommendation then goes to the Residential Re-entry Management Office at the BOP Regional

Office for final approval.

       Although inmates at institutions having a high incidence of COVID-19 infections were

given first priority, the Attorney General mandated that the review should include all at-risk




       6
         See Attorney General’s Memorandum for Director of Bureau of Prisons, Prioritization of
Home Confinement As Appropriate in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic (March 26, 2020),
available at https://www.bop.gov/coronavirus/docs/bop_memo_home_confinement.pdf (last
accessed on February 8, 2021).


                                                  9
inmates. 7 As of January 19, 2021, BOP has placed 20,480 inmates on home confinement

(including those who have completed their sentences) pursuant to this authority. 8

                                      III.   ARGUMENT

       Amadin has not established that he is at severe risk of serious illness were he to contract

the COVID-19 virus or that the COVID-19 pandemic thus presents an extraordinary and

compelling reason warranting his release at this time. Instead, Amadin speculates that his mental

health condition puts him at serious risk of infection. Even if that were true, however, Amadin’s

mental health does not present a significant risk of complications. Furthermore, even if Amadin’s

medical conditions placed him at severe risk of serious illness were he to contract the COVID-19

virus, the § 3553(a) factors—particularly the magnitude of Amadin’s prior offense—would

nonetheless support his continued incarceration.

       A.      Amadin’s Medical Conditions Does Not Place Him at Increased Risk of
               Severe Illness from COVID-19.

       While COVID-19 is a new disease and much continues to be learned about the disease on

a daily basis, medical evidence from the CDC indicates that Amadin is not currently at greater risk

than most inmates in the federal system. As more data relating to COVID-19 is collected and

analyzed, the CDC is regularly reviewing and revising the risk profile for individuals with certain

underlying medical conditions.      Based upon this review, the CDC has identified certain




       7
         Attorney General’s Memorandum for Director of Bureau of Prisons, Increasing Use of
Home Confinement at Institutions Most Affected by COVID-19 (April 3, 2020), available at
https://www.bop.gov/coronavirus/docs/bop_memo_home_confinement_april3.pdf (last accessed
on November 10, 2020).
       8
         See BOP, Frequently Asked Questions regarding potential inmate home confinement in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, available at https://www.bop.gov/coronavirus/faq.jsp (last
visited on January 19, 2021).


                                                10
individuals, based upon their increased age and/or preexisting medical conditions, who are at an

increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19.

        The CDC currently has identified the following preexisting medical conditions of placing

individuals at any age “at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19: cancer; chronic kidney

disease; COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease); down syndrome; heart conditions, such

as heart failure, coronary artery disease, or cardiomyopathies; immunocompromised state

(weakened immune system) from solid organ transplant; obesity (body mass index [BMI] of 30

kg/m2 or higher but < 40 kg/m2); severe obesity (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2); pregnancy; sickle cell disease;

smoking; and Type 2 diabetes mellitus.” See CDC, People with Certain Medical Conditions,

available at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-with-

medical-conditions.html (last accessed February 8, 2021) (emphasis in original) (hereinafter “CDC

COVID-19 Guidance”). Amadin does not suggest that he meets any of these “high risk” CDC

categories.

        Amadin’s medical records do not demonstrate that he is currently suffering from a

condition that would necessitate his immediate release from custody. Instead, Amadin argues that

“anxiety, depression, insomnia, and panic attacks weaken his immune system and make him vulnerable

should he contract COVID-19.” Def’s. Mot. at 16. However, there is no indication within the CDC

COVID-19 Guidance of this being true. The most analogous criterion for a potential increase of risk

is “Neurological conditions such as dementia.” See CDC COVID-19 Guidance. This criterion is not

applicable for two reasons. First, this criterion falls into the latter category of individuals who “might

be at an increased risk for severe illness from the virus that causes COVID-19.” Id. (emphasis in

original). Compassionate release has almost entirely been granted for defendants who, instead, “are”

at an increased risk. See, e.g., United States v. Rodriguez, 451 F. Supp. 3d 392, 401 (E.D. Pa. 2020)

(granting compassionate release to an obese defendant with Type 2 diabetes mellitus). Secondly,

                                                   11
neurological conditions are considered neurological disorders, and “include epilepsy, Alzheimer

disease and other dementias, cerebrovascular diseases including stroke, migraine and other headache

disorders, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, neuroinfections, brain tumours [sic], traumatic

disorders of the nervous system due to head trauma, and neurological disorders as a result of

malnutrition.”   World     Health   Organization,    Mental    health:    neurological     disorders,

https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/mental-health-neurological-disorders#,    (last   accessed

February 6, 2021). These conditions align with BOP Program Statement 5050.50, which describes

cognitive deficits similarly.

       Defendant’s more compelling argument is that he has a family history of hypertension.

Indeed, Defendant did have high blood pressure in 2018, and his blood pressure at that time may

have indicated “Stage 2 Hypertension.” Def’s. Mot. at 8. However, Defendant has not provided

any indication of what his blood pressure is at this time. The blood pressure readings provided by

Defendant are nearly three years old. See id. He may have lower numbers now than he did then.

Moreover, even if it is true that he has a family history of hypertension, that alone does not place

him at an increased risk of COVID-19 complications. Instead, several steps along a causal chain

must be satisfied in order for Amadin to be considered at risk by the CDC COVID-19 guidelines.

First, there must be readings indicating that Amadin is presently indicating hypertension. Next,

there must be a diagnosis of hypertension. Satisfying each of these conditions puts Amadin in the

latter category of individuals who “might be at an increased risk for severe illness from the virus

that causes COVID-19.” Id. (emphasis in original). Even at this point, however, Amadin is not

necessarily at an increased risk of COVID complications. This risk must be elevated to being “at

increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19.” Id. (emphasis in original).

       Defendant’s analysis therefore fundamentally misinterprets Section 1B1.13. Amadin

argues that his “mental health issues, compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic, have substantially

                                                12
diminished [his] ability to provide self-care in BOP custody.” Def.’s Mot. at 10-14. As a result,

he argues, there is an extraordinary and compelling reason for his compassionate release. See id.

at 2. However, this analysis ignores Note 1(A) from which it is derived. The medical condition

must then “substantially diminish[] the ability of the defendant to provide self-care within the

environment of a correctional facility . . . .” U.S.S.G. § 1B1.13 Application Note 1. In addition,

the condition must be one in which defendant “is not expected to recover.” Id. Therefore, both

Amadin’s mental health issues and his 2018 blood pressure readings alleging hypertension fail to

satisfy 1B1.13 for two reasons. First, neither would qualify under Note 1(A)(ii) as a serious

medical condition, serious functional or cognitive impairment, or deteriorating mental health as a

result of aging. 9 See id. at App. Note 1(A)(ii). Secondly, there is no reason to believe that

Defendant will not recover from his mental health issues or high blood pressure. To the contrary,

given his relatively young age, there is reason to believe that he should be able to recover.

       Amadin’s arguments with regards to family history are also irrelevant. Having a family

history of a medical condition does not qualify as a medical offense within the definition of

U.S.S.G. § 1B1.13 Application Note 1. Those requirements are clearly defined and specific. Both

Note 1(C)(i) and (ii) involve the death or incapacitation of an immediate family member. Neither

is applicable to Amadin. As a result, Amadin’s arguments regarding his family history of medical

conditions not only fails to fall within Note 1(A), it also fails to fall within Note 1(C).

       Amadin does not support his argument that he is at a greater risk of infection with anything

more than generalized statistics regarding infections in BOP facilities. For example, Defendant

argues that “there are over 3,000 active COVID-19 cases among BOP inmates across the nation

and nearly 2,000 cases among BOP staff.” Defendant’s Motion at 9-10. This does not demonstrate


       9
           Because Amadin’s alleged illness is not terminal, App. Note 1(A)(i) is not applicable.


                                                  13
that Amadin is at a greater risk of COVID-19 than other inmates. In fact, Amadin’s argument cuts

against him. Amadin does not point to any active cases of COVID-19 amongst BOP inmates at

FCI-Berlin. Instead, he relies upon a minute number of active COVID-19 case amongst FCI-

Berlin staff. Id. at 10. Given that, as Amadin points out, there are “nearly 2,000 [active] cases

among BOP staff,” Id. at 10, and only a very small number 10 of these active cases are at FCI-

Berlin, Amadin appears to have a remarkably small risk of infection compared to inmates at other

BOP facilities.

       Therefore, not only has Amadin not demonstrated that he is at a risk of COVID

complications, he has actually demonstrated that his risk of infection may actually be lower than

that of inmates at other facilities. This latter factor alone significantly reduces Amadin’s risk of

severe illness from COVID-19. As a result, Amadin is not an inmate for whom compassionate

release is warranted.

       B.         FCI-Berlin Has Taken Steps to Significantly Reduce the Risk of COVID-19
                  Infection among Inmates and Staff

       The measures that the BOP has adopted to combat the COVID-19 virus have proven

successful to varying degrees at its facilities throughout the country. To date, FCI-Berlin, the

institution where Amadin is incarcerated, has successfully contained and mitigated against an

outbreak by implementing additional procedures and safeguards. The numbers bear this out: as

of February 8, 2021, there are only three staff members having confirmed COVID-19 infections

and zero inmates with a confirmed COVID-19 diagnosis. See BOP, Covid-19 Cases, available at

https://www.bop.gov/coronavirus/ (last accessed February 8, 2021). BOP also reports that there


       10
          Defendant points to one active case at the time filing. However, as will be discussed in
the next Section, BOP statistics have pointed out that there may instead be a total of three active
cases amongst staff at the time of filing. See BOP, Covid-19 Cases, available at
https://www.bop.gov/coronavirus/ (last accessed February 8, 2021).


                                                14
have are nine inmates at FCI-Berlin who have recovered from positive tests, and there have been

no deaths. Id.     This is a reflection of FCI-Berlin’s successful implementation of policies and

procedures designed to control and mitigate the spread of the virus. BOP has pledged to continue

monitoring the pandemic and to adjust its practices as necessary to maintain the safety of prison

staff and inmates while also fulfilling its mandate of incarcerating all persons sentenced or detained

based on judicial orders. See, e.g., United States v. Edwards, 2020 WL 5518322, *3 (D.D.C. Sept.

12, 2020) (rejecting defendant’s argument for compassionate release and noting that the conditions

at FCI Berlin “pose comparatively little risk in terms of COVID-19 exposure”); accord United

States v. Pomales, 2020 WL 4677596, *3 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 12, 2020) (noting that the “relative lack

of positive COVID-19 cases in and around FCI Berlin, together with the steps that the BOP is

taking to counter the spread of COVID-19 in its facilities as a whole also weigh against a finding

of extraordinary and compelling circumstances”). 11

       C.        The § 3553(a) Sentencing Factors Overwhelmingly Support Amadin’s
                 Continued Incarceration

       Even if Amadin’s medical conditions provided an extraordinary and compelling reason

warranting consideration for compassionate release pursuant to § 1B1.13(1)(A), which the

government contests, he must still demonstrate that his proposed release is “consistent with

applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission.” 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A).

This, in turn, requires consideration of the factors expressed in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)—including,

inter alia, the nature and circumstances of the offense; the history and characteristics of the

defendant; the need for the sentence imposed to provide the defendant with needed . . . medical


       11
           Coos County, New Hampshire, where FCI-Berlin is located, has only had a cumulative
total of 1,194 COVID-19 infections and 31 deaths since the pandemic began. See New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services, COVID-19 Interactive Map Dashboard,
https://www.nh.gov/covid19/dashboard/map.htm#dash (last accessed on February 8, 2021).


                                                 15
care or other correctional treatment; the applicable guidelines; and pertinent Sentencing

Commission policy statements. See USSG § 1B1.13.

       Upon consideration of these factors, the scale tips overwhelmingly in favor of Amadin’s

continued incarceration. Amadin was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm. PSR

¶ 2. The firearm alone makes this a very serious offense. United States v. Leviner, 31 F. Supp. 2d

23, 25 (D. Mass. 1998) (calling the offense “unquestionably a serious one,” especially upon

hearing gunshots immediately prior). The offense may be considered even more serious when a

Defendant is affiliated with a gang. See, e.g., United States v. Monell, 801 F.3d 34, 50 (1st Cir.

2015) (holding “gang membership and affiliation” to be aggravating factors). There is also

evidence that Amadin knew he should not have been in possession of a firearm. Throughout his

attempt to flee the officers, Amadin held a weapon closely to him. PSR ¶¶ 12-13. Right before

the case ended, Amadin threw his weapon onto the roof of a nearby garage. PSR ¶ 14. After

completing the throw, he gave himself up to authorities, PSR ¶¶ 14-15, likely figuring that

authorities no longer had evidence of any wrongdoing. Indeed, Amadin could have kept running

after removing the firearm from his person, but he elected not to do so. PSR ¶¶ 14-15.

       Amadin has not completed half of his sentence for this very serious offense. Amadin

argues, despite this fact, he should be put on supervised released for the remainder of his sentence.

Def.’s Mot. at 18-19. As is stated at the outset of Section 1b1.13, the Court “may impose a term

of supervised release with or without conditions that does not exceed the unserved portion of the

original term of imprisonment.” USSG § 1B1.13 (emphasis added). If the Court were to

compassionately release Amadin at this time, it would necessarily be imposing a term of

supervised release that is longer than his remaining term of imprisonment.




                                                 16
       Furthermore, Amadin has a significant criminal record as well, with charges for carrying a

loaded firearm without license, possessing ammunition without FID card, and firearms violations

with two prior violent/drug crimes. PSR ¶¶ 58. Amadin has also been charged with violent

offenses, such as domestic assault & battery and threat to commit bodily harm. PSR ¶¶ 55.

Furthermore, Amadin has repeatedly violated his probation. PSR ¶¶ 47, 55, 56.              Amadin’s

criminal history, particularly his history of prior violent offenses, his gang affiliation, as well as

the seriousness of the instant offense, demonstrate a risk to the community should Amadin be

released. Cf. United States v. Omay Ford, No. 11-Cr-10062-NMG, ECF. Dkt. 1348 (D. Mass.

Aug. 14, 2020) (although defendant suffered from condition that might cause increased risk of

severe illness from COVID-19 and was incarcerated at institution that was previous “hot spot,”

compassionate release not warranted given that prison’s policies and procedures had “dramatically

reduced the rate of COVID-19 infections,” that the defendant was “a career criminal who has spent

much of the past 20 years in prison,” and that the defendant was “currently serving a 15-year

sentence for an egregious criminal offense”).

                                       V.   CONCLUSION

       The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented public health emergency that has caused

great concern throughout the world. It does not, however, require the release of all federal

inmates. Amadin is a dangerous criminal whose medical conditions do not require his release.

His motion for compassionate release should be denied.

                                                       Respectfully submitted,

                                                       ANDREW E. LELLING
                                                       United States Attorney

                                                By:    /s/ Timothy E. Moran
                                                       TIMOTHY E. MORAN
                                                       Assistant United States Attorney


                                                  17
                                 CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

       I hereby certify that the foregoing was filed through the Electronic Court Filing system
and will be sent electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of
Electronic Filing.

                                                    /s/ Timothy E. Moran
                                                    TIMOTHY E. MORAN
                                                    Assistant United States Attorney

February 13, 2021




                                               18
