            Case 1:20-cr-10240-DJC Document 23 Filed 04/20/21 Page 1 of 3




                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

           v.                                        Criminal No. 20-CR-10240-DJC

 RAMON MARTINEZ, a/k/a “King Razor”


           Defendant


       MEMORANDUM IN SUPPORT OF SENTENCING RECOMMENDATION

       The government submits the instant memorandum in support of its recommendation for 51

months of incarceration for the defendant, RAMON MARTINEZ. This recommendation reflects

the seriousness of the offense and the defendant’s criminal history, while also providing specific

deterrence, an opportunity for rehabilitation and promoting respect for the law.

                       THE ADVISORY SENTENCING GUIDELINES1

       The parties position in the plea agreement is in accordance with the calculation by

Probation in the final Presentence Report. The defendant’s base offense level of 24 (pursuant to

USSG §2K2.1(a)(2)) is reduced by three levels due to his prompt acceptance of responsibility, for

a total offense level of 21. See PSR ¶¶17, 24. With a criminal history score of III (PSR ¶¶42, 43),

the guideline sentencing range is 46-57 months. See PSR ¶89.

                                          ARGUMENT

       The Defendant’s possession of the firearm in this case comes after multiple prior drug

convictions (PSR ¶¶36, 37, 38, 40), and while wanted for a robbery and carjacking that are pending

in state Court. See PSR ¶46. While the Defendant has served prison time before, that sentence



       1
           References to the presentence report are by paragraph (PSR ¶_).


                                                 1
           Case 1:20-cr-10240-DJC Document 23 Filed 04/20/21 Page 2 of 3




obviously did not impress upon the defendant the necessity of conforming his conduct to the law.

See PSR ¶37. A significant multiple-year prison term as recommended by the government

properly reflects an increasing sanction for the Defendant’s continuing criminal conduct and the

circumstances of this case, which involve the defendant possessing a dangerous weapon.

       In considering the length of the sentence, the Court should evaluate the defendant’s record

in its assessment of his likelihood of reoffending and the need to provide specific deterrence. The

Defendant’s prior New Hampshire prison sentence was a so-called “split-sentence,” where he

served 12 months initially and then an additional twelve months after violating probation. See

PSR ¶37. In this context, specific deterrence would not be furthered by a sentence below the

guidelines or that in some respect varies downward from the guidelines.2

       The nature and circumstances of this defendant’s firearm possession, especially in the days

following a robbery, while wanted for that robbery, as well as his personal history and

characteristics, justify a sentence of 51 months. A sentence of this length adequately reflects the

seriousness of the offense and will specifically deter the defendant from future crimes. This

sentence also serves the purposes of promoting respect for the law and providing just—but not

excessive—punishment for the harm the defendant caused to the community through his

possession of a dangerous weapon that he is prohibited from possessing. On consideration of all

these factors, 51 months is a fair and just sentence.



       2
          The government notes that the Defendant’s immediate acceptance of responsibility and
waiver of indictment are the basis for which it is not seeking a sentence at the high-end of the
guidelines. A sentence at the high-end of the guidelines would be more than justified by the
facts and circumstances, including the social-media postings by the defendant suggesting that he
fired the firearm a few days before it was recovered, and ballistics match to the incident posted
by the defendant. See PSR ¶¶27-34. While probation does not consider it relevant conduct, the
social media postings and ballistics match are in fact probative of the Defendant’s actual
possession of the firearm.


                                                  2
          Case 1:20-cr-10240-DJC Document 23 Filed 04/20/21 Page 3 of 3




                                         CONCLUSION

       The Court should impose a sentence of 51 months of incarceration.

                                                      Respectfully submitted,

                                                      ANDREW E. LELLING
                                                      United States Attorney
                                              By:
                                                      /s/ Philip A. Mallard
                                                      PHILIP A. MALLARD
                                                      Assistant U.S. Attorney
                                                      United States Attorney’s Office
                                                      1 Courthouse Way, Suite 9200
                                                      Boston MA 02210
                                                      617-748-3674

                                  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I hereby certify that this document filed through the ECF system will be sent
electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing (NEF).

                                                      /s/ Philip A. Mallard
                                                      Philip A. Mallard
Date: April 20, 2021                                  Assistant U.S. Attorney




                                                 3
