Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 1 of 9                     PageID #: 157



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                    )
                                             )
       v.                                    )
                                             )                Crim. No. 04-10-B-W
DANE PAQUETTE,                               )
                                             )
               Defendant                     )


               RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS

       Dane Paquette is charged in an indictment with two counts of possession of unregistered

firearms, in violation of Title 26, United States Code, Section 5861(d). Paquette has moved to

suppress the firearms, which he maintains were discovered pursuant to the execution of an

unconstitutiona lly general portion of a search warrant. I held a telephone conference on March

25, 2005, in order to determine whether Paquette or the Government wished to have an

evidentiary hearing on the motion. Both agreed that an evidentiary hearing was not necessary at

this juncture. Paquette, however, requested that an evidentiary hearing be held if the court

concludes that the "good faith" exception to the warrant requirement affords the only basis

available to prevent the exclusion of the evidence. I recommend that the court adopt the

following factual findings and deny the motion to suppress.

                                          Background

       On September 14, 2003, a judge of the Maine District Court executed a nighttime, no-

knock warrant to search apartment 9 of a multi- unit apartment complex located on Route 201 in

Vassalboro, which was at that time the premises of one Jason Harfoush and a black male

identified only as "J." The warrant described the place to be searched as a "residence," described
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 2 of 9                       PageID #: 158



the residence as "a first floor front apartment (apartment #9)" and authorized officers to search

that "residence" and also "motor vehicles that are present at, and/or arrive at said residence."

The affidavit submitted in support of the warrant recited facts and circumstances that

unquestionably gave rise to probable cause to believe that the occupants of the residence were

trafficking in scheduled drugs and that narcotics, other evidence of drug trafficking and other

contraband would likely be discovered at the residence, on the persons of those found at the

residence or within motor vehicles owned or operated by those present at or arriving at the

residence during the execution of the warrant. Among the many articles of property to be

searched for, the warrant indicated that the officers might seek "firearms in close proximity to

illicit drugs and contraband."

       Deputies from the Kennebec and Somerset County Sheriff's Office executed the warrant

on September 14, 2003. The report in the record reflects that the officers forcibly entered the

residence unannounced and discovered inside three individuals, none of whom resided at the

residence. Questioning by the officers revealed the individuals to be David Peachey, Dane

Paquette and Joni Dorage. According to the supplemental report of Detective Tom Rourke, he

interviewed Ms. Dorage, who informed him that the three had recently arrived in Maine from the

State of Washington and had been staying at different residences since then. A search of the

vehicle in which the three were traveling, and which is or was owned by Ms. Dorage, produced

three firearms, two of which were short-barreled shotguns. According to a report prepared by

Corporal Jeremy Damren, he brought Dane Paquette outside the residence after the three were

secured and gave Paquette a Miranda warning. Paquette indicated that he understood the

warning. Thereafter Paquette stated in response to questioning that he was staying at the

residence for a few days and that he did not know where Harfoush and J were at that time. He




                                                  2
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 3 of 9                         PageID #: 159



was then returned to the residence. Meanwhile, Detective Rourke had been questioning Peachey,

who informed him that one of the short-barreled shotguns belonged to Paquette, whereupon

Paquette was brought outside again for further questioning. Both Detective Rourke and Corporal

Damren report that Paquette initially denied knowledge of any guns, but subsequently conceded

that one of the shotguns was his. About this time, Corporal Damren went to question the

occupants of a vehicle that pulled into the driveway of the apartment complex. According to

Damren, he recognized both the driver and the passenger as individuals subject to bail

conditions. A search of the two occupants yielded 10 bags of heroin. As this was transpiring,

Detective Rourke continued to question Paquette. According to Rourke, Paquette stated that he

brought the shotgun from Washington and that he knew that it was illegal for him to possess it.

                                              Discussion

        Paquette contends that the search warrant was unconstitutional and that the search of

Dorage's vehicle and seizure of the shotguns violated his constitutional rights because the

warrant "does not describe which car (or cars) to search, or how an officer's discretion would be

limited in deciding which cars to search." (Motion to Suppress, Docket No. 53, at 2.) According

to Paquette: "With respect to cars, the warrant became a general warrant which allowed the

deputies to determine, without any judicial supervision or oversight, which cars they would

search. . . . . A search warrant that allows the officers to search any car at, or arriving at, a

multi- unit apartment complex, which apparently had at least nine apartments, is overbroad." (Id.

at 2-3.) In addition to refuting the suggestion that the warrant was overbroad or general, the

Government attacks Paquette's ability to challenge the search, claiming he lacked a reasonable

expectation of privacy vis-à-vis Dorage's vehicle. (Gov't Resp., Docket No. 56, at 3-4.)




                                                   3
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 4 of 9                      PageID #: 160



A.     Expectation of Privacy

       "Fourth Amendment rights are personal, and a proponent of a motion to suppress must

prove that the challenged governmental action infringed upon his own Fourth Amendment

rights." United States v. Kimball, 25 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1994). In Kimball, the First Circuit held

that a passenger in a motor vehicle has a cognizable Fourth Amendment interest in not being

subjected to an unreasonable seizure, or traffic stop. Id. Also at issue in the case was the

separate question of what expectation of privacy a passenger has in a motor vehicle in relation to

a search of its contents. Id. at 9. According to the Court: "Standing to challenge a search

presents issues separate and distinct from standing to challenge the stop." Id. Although the

Court found standing to challenge the seizure, it held that the defendant lacked standing to

challenge an inventory search conducted pursuant to an impoundment of the vehicle. Id. With

respect to standing to challenge the search, the First Circuit held that the defendant "must show

that he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area searched and in relation to the item

seized." Id. at 9 (quotation marks and citations omitted). A showing of reasonable expectation

must be two-dimensional: "The defendant must show both a subjective expectation of privacy

and that society accepts that expectation as objectively reasonable." Id. (quotation marks and

citations omitted).

       Paquette argues that he has an expectation of privacy under these circumstances because

the shotgun was concealed in the car, he owned the shotgun and stated his ownership interest to

the officers following the search and nobody can say who was most frequently the operator of

the vehicle. He also posits that he has standing to challenge the warrant because he was an

overnight guest at the residence. (Def's Reply, Docket No. 60, at 1-2.) I do not believe that

Paquette's expectation of privacy within the residence, by virtue of being an overnight guest,




                                                 4
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 5 of 9                                    PageID #: 161



overrides the inquiry into his expectation of privacy in the trunk of Dorage's vehicle. The

standard requires a showing of a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area searched: the

trunk of Dorage's car. First Circuit precedent reflects that, in general, “standing” 1 does not exist

to challenge a search of a vehicle when the defendant neither owns nor is in possession of the

vehicle in question. United States v. Maguire, 918 F.2d 254, 261 (1st Cir. 1990) (citing cases).

In my view, the facts and circumstances related in the police reports are not sufficient to

establish Paquette's standing. They reflect that Paquette was neither the owner nor the individual

in exclusive possession of the vehicle. Although these factors are not dispositive, see Rakas v.

Illinois, 439 U.S. 128, 143 (1978) (holding that "distinctions developed in property and tort law

between guests, licensees, invitees, and the like, ought not to control"), these factors place

Paquette among the mine run of other defendants who have been held to lack standing to

challenge a search of a trunk compartment. See, e.g., Rakas, 439 U.S. at 148-49; Maguire, 918

F.2d at 261; United States v. Barragan, 379 F.3d 524, 530 (8th Cir. 2004); United States v.

Baker, 221 F.3d 438, 441-42 (3d Cir. 2000). Paquette's ownership of the article seized does not

automatically confer standing. See United States v. Goshorn, 628 F.2d 697, 700 (1st Cir. 1980).

         Conceivably, Paquette might be able to establish both "historical use" of the vehicle and

that he was able to "regulate access" to it, in light of the fact that it had served as his conveyance

over a period of weeks. However, the police reports are not ideally suited to demonstrate

Paquette's subjective expectations of privacy2 and the First Circuit has cautioned that "the

purchase necessary to come to grips with an allegedly illegal search or seizure . . . does not

automatically devolve upon every accused." United States v. Aguirre, 839 F.2d 854, 856 (1st


1
        Following the First Circuit’s lead, I recognize the nomenclature is imprecise, but I use the phrase
"standing" in reference to this threshold requirement. See United States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 68 (1st Cir. 2004).
2
        For example, the reports are silent as to whether either shotgun was secreted within a bag or other private
container to which Paquette has exclusive access.


                                                         5
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 6 of 9                       PageID #: 162



Cir. 1988). Even if a subjective expectation were established on this record, I am not inclined to

find that society would consider it reasonable for an individual to expect to keep private from a

vehicle owner with whom he is traveling the fact that he has placed a firearm in the trunk and, in

any event, the record reflects that the presence of the shotgun was known at least to Paquette's

fellow traveler Peachey. Accordingly, on this record I conclude that Paquette lacks standing to

challenge the constitutionality of the search of Dorage's vehicle. In any event, even if Paquette

has standing to challenge the search of the vehicle's trunk, it is apparent that the warrant

authorizing the search of the vehicle was supported by probable cause and was reasonably

limited in its scope and that the connection between the residence and the vehicle in question

made the search reasonable.

B.     The Warrant

       "The Fourth Amendment forbids general warrants so as to prevent law enforcement

officers from rummaging through an individual's belongings at will." United States v. Beckett,

321 F.3d 26, 33 (1st Cir. 2003) (citing Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U.S. 463, 480 (1976)). As set

forth in my factual recitation, the warrant in question included as places and things to be

searched the "residence" (described as "a first floor front apartment (apartment #9)") and "motor

vehicles that are present at, and/or arrive at said residence." The common sense reading of the

warrant is that it conditions the officers' authority to search a vehicle upon the vehicle's presence

or arrival at apartment 9. In other words, the vehicle must be associated with apartment 9.

Moreover, the warrant appropriately limited the officer's ability to seize items discovered during

any vehicle search.




                                                  6
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 7 of 9                        PageID #: 163



C.     Wong Sun v. United States

       Paquette ends his motion with an argument that the seizure of the shotguns was

unreasonable because it was not expressly authorized by the warrant. He also argues, by

extension, that it was inappropriate for the officers to question him concerning the shotguns.

According to Paquette, because his statements related to the shotguns were obtained solely as a

consequence of an unlawful seizure of the guns, his statements to the officers must be suppressed

as "fruit of the poisonous tree" in accordance with Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471

(1963). In support of this aspect of his motion, Paquette observes that the warrant authorized the

seizure of firearms "in close proximity to illicit drugs and contraband." Because there were no

drugs found in Dorage's vehicle and because possession of a short-barreled shotgun is not per se

illegal, Paquette argues that it was unconstitutional to seize the guns and question him regarding

them. (Motion to Suppress at 3-4.)

       Although Paquette is correct about the limitation stated in the warrant, the theorem he

attempts to build from that factual premise is flawed. Under Terry v. Ohio, 329 U.S. 20 (1968),

officers are allowed to briefly detain and question a suspect in order to confirm or dispel their

suspicions about his involvement in unlawful activity, provided they possess reasonable

suspicion concerning that involvement. Paquette fails to cite any authority for the proposition

that officers, during the execution of a search warrant, may not conduct Terry-style questioning

that is not directly related to the objective of the warrant. Although I have not found a case

squarely on point, strong persuasive authorities reflect that Paquette's counter- intuitive

proposition is well out of bounds. Cf. Michigan v. Summers, 452 U.S. 692, 702-04 (1981)

(holding that officers executing a search warrant at a residence may detain a resident for the

duration of the search); United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 881-882 (1975)




                                                  7
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 8 of 9                                  PageID #: 164



(observing in the context of a roadblock case that "suspicious circumstances" unrelated to the

purpose of the roadblock can justify questioning).

        The Fourth Amendment does not require a policeman who lacks the precise level
        of information necessary for probable cause to arrest to simply shrug his
        shoulders and allow a crime to occur or a criminal to escape. On the contrary,
        Terry recognizes that it may be the essence of good police work to adopt an
        intermediate response.

Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. at 881 (quoting Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143 (1972)). Upon the

discovery of two short-barreled shotguns during the execution of a search warrant in connection

with a drug trafficking investigation, it was reasonable for the officers to conduct an ancillary

investigation into the ownership and registration of the weapons. During the course of the

officers' questioning, according to the only record available at this time, Paquette not only

conceded ownership over one of the shotguns, but also conceded that he knew it was illegal for

him to possess the weapon. Paquette's confession thus afforded the officers with probable cause

to believe that the shotgun was evidence of a crime and to seize it. 3 Because the discovery of the

shotgun and the questioning concerning it did not offend the Fourth Amendment, Wong Sun is

not implicated in this case.

                                                  Conclusion

        For the reasons set forth herein, I RECOMMEND that the court DENY the defendant's

motion to suppress (Docket No. 53).

                                                   NOTICE

               A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
        judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
        28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
        together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the

3
         Paquette disavowed ownership of the second shotgun, which was claimed by Dave Peachey. Accordingly,
he does not have standing to challenge the seizure of the second shotgun. Cf. United States v. Miller, 589 F.2d
1117, 1131 (1st Cir. 1978) ("[O]ne who denies any interest in luggage has abandoned the property and thereby loses
any standing to challenge an ensuing search.").


                                                        8
Case 1:04-cr-00010-JAW Document 63 Filed 04/12/05 Page 9 of 9                       PageID #: 165



       district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
       thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
       district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.



                                              /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                              U.S. Magistrate Judge
Dated April 12, 2005




                                                 9
