        Case 1:05-cr-10130-RWZ Document 19 Filed 12/05/05 Page 1 of 5



                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                          DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

                        CRIMINAL ACTION NO. 05-10130-RWZ


                            UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                                            v.

                                  CLIVE MCFARLANE


                            MEMORANDUM OF DECISION

                                   December 5, 2005

ZOBEL, D.J.

      On April 28, 2005, Brockton police officer David Delehoy was driving to work in

his own car. While stopped at a stoplight, he heard loud noises that he believed to be

gunshots. He looked in the direction of the gunshots and observed a group of

approximately eight individuals in an empty parking lot. He immediately turned the

corner, drove toward the parking lot and saw an individual (hereinafter, “A”) run from

the area of the group. After losing sight of for a matter of moments when some

buildings blocked his sight line, Officer Delehoy recognized A walking away quickly.

He then witnessed a second person, later determined to be defendant Clive McFarlane,

walking rapidly about 150 feet behind A. Officer Delehoy saw A look over his shoulder,

apparently spy defendant and instantly begin sprinting. As A cut across a barren lot

next to a house, Officer Delehoy followed him in his vehicle, never losing sight of him,

and when he caught up with A, offered help. When A stopped running, Officer Delehoy

identified himself as a Brockton police officer and ordered him to show his hands.
         Case 1:05-cr-10130-RWZ Document 19 Filed 12/05/05 Page 2 of 5



According to Officer Delehoy, A appeared relieved and reported that defendant was

attempting to shoot him. Defendant now rounded the corner and approached the

barren lot, apparently without having noticed Officer Delehoy’s presence. Officer

Delehoy observed defendant remove the cover to a trash can next to the house, take

out the can liner, bend into the can with both arms, replace the liner and leave. Officer

Delehoy decided that defendant posed a more significant threat than did A and

therefore drew his weapon and ordered defendant to raise his hands and lie on the

ground. After backup officers arrived, he investigated the trash can opened by

defendant. He found a revolver beneath the liner and authorized defendant’s arrest.

       Defendant now moves to suppress all evidence on the basis that Officer Delehoy

had neither reasonable suspicion nor probable cause to stop him. The government

argues that the totality of circumstances leading up to the arrest sufficiently established

probable cause for defendant’s arrest and, at a minimum, demonstrated reasonable

suspicion for a brief, investigative stop, known as a Terry stop. See Terry v. Ohio, 392

U.S. 1 (1968). The parties argued their respective positions further in a suppression

hearing before the court on November 30, 2005.

       “[A]n officer may conduct a brief investigatory stop if he has a reasonable,

articulable suspicion that criminal activity is afoot.” U.S. v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71

(1st Cir. 2004). In determining whether reasonable suspicion exists, a law enforcement

officer may rely on both personal observations and “information furnished by others” if

such information “carries ‘sufficient indicia of reliability’ to warrant acting upon it.” Id.

(internal citations omitted). Decisions should not be based on “gossip or innuendo”


                                               2
         Case 1:05-cr-10130-RWZ Document 19 Filed 12/05/05 Page 3 of 5



but, instead, should reflect an “examination of all the circumstances bearing upon the

tip itself and tipster’s veracity, reliability, and basis of knowledge.” Id. For example, a

“face-to-face encounter provides police officers the opportunity to perceive and

evaluate personally an informant’s mannerisms, expressions, and tone of voice (and

thus to assess the informant’s veracity more readily than could be done from a purely

anonymous telephone tip).” Id. at 73. ”A court inquiring into the validity of a Terry stop

must use a wide lens and survey the totality of the circumstances,” bearing in mind that

the “touchstone is reasonableness.” Id. at 71.

       Defendant argues that reasonable suspicion did not support his arrest, because

Officer Delehoy relied upon a tip from A, “an unknown, unaccountable man who himself

was under surveillance and who when out of the detective’s sight could have put the

gun in the trashcan.” (Def.’s Mem. of Law in Support of Mot. 9). Defendant’s

characterization of A fails, however, to account for Officer Delehoy’s own observations

and his credible testimony that he heard what he believed to be gunshots, that he

witnessed a group of individuals in the area from where the gunshots emanated, and

that he then saw the first individual flee the group while being apparently followed by

defendant. Based on these observations, his years of experience as an officer, and his

knowledge that violent crimes often occurred in that neighborhood, Officer Delehoy

formed a reasonable opinion that defendant was chasing A, and A’s manner

“suggested a likelihood that [he] was concerned for [his] own safety.” Romain, 393

F.3d at 73. A’s “willingness to reconfirm” Officer Delehoy’s own perception of the

events, “under circumstances that might immediately reveal its truth or falsity, suggests


                                             3
          Case 1:05-cr-10130-RWZ Document 19 Filed 12/05/05 Page 4 of 5



a higher degree of reliability than a wholly anonymous telephone call.” Id. If A was

lying to Officer Delehoy, he risked swift reprisal since defendant was continuing to

pursue him and fast approached their meeting. Having himself watched the activity

following the gunshots, Officer Delehoy knew that A “acquired [his] information through

first-hand observation.” Id. This direct interaction allowed Officer Delehoy “to gauge

[A’s] veracity and to make some informed assessment of the reliability of the tip.” Id. at

74. Although defendant argues in his brief that A himself may have placed the weapon

in the trash can, he fails to reconcile this assertion with Officer Delehoy’s testimony that

he never lost sight of A and never saw him open the trash can.

       Upon stopping defendant, Officer Delehoy detained him for a matter of moments

until back-up arrived, and he had an opportunity to investigate the trash can. He

testified that he arrested defendant after finding the weapon. Although defendant

argues that the detention itself effectively constituted an arrest, since defendant

perceived that he was under arrest, his perception alone does not render unreasonable

Officer Delehoy’s suspicion that defendant may be armed and dangerous. “It cannot be

said that a display of a gun by a police officer automatically converts a stop into an

arrest.” U.S. v. Trullo, 809 F.2d 108, 113 (1st Cir. 1987). Officer Delehoy’s fear for his

own safety and that of others adequately justified the brief detention and scope of

police activity surrounding defendant’s eventual arrest.

       Accordingly, reasonable suspicion supported the stop, and analysis of probable

cause is unnecessary. Defendant’s motion to suppress (# # 9 and 10 on the docket) is

denied.


                                             4
 Case 1:05-cr-10130-RWZ Document 19 Filed 12/05/05 Page 5 of 5




                            /s/ Rya W.Zobel
DATE                        RYA W. ZOBEL
                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                              5
