Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 1 of 7                     PageID #: 30



                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                    DISTRICT OF MAINE


  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                     )
                                                )
         v.                                     )
                                                )       Crim. No. 05-35-B-W
  BRIAN MICHAUD,                                )
                                                )
                         Defendant.             )

              RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS

         Brian Michaud, who is charged in a one count indictment with possession of a

  firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), has filed a motion to suppress at trial any

  evidence seized as a result of what he describes as an unlawful motor vehicle stop by law

  enforcement authorities. (Docket No. 7.) Michaud claims that the pickup truck in which

  he was a passenger was stopped without sufficient articulable suspicion of wrongful

  conduct in violation of the Fourth Amendment. I now recommend the court adopt these

  proposed findings of fact and deny the motion.

                                  Proposed Findings of Fact

         On November 5, 2004, at approximately 11:55 p.m., Peggy Wagner, a dispatcher

  for Penobscot Regional Dispatch, received a telephone call forwarded to her from the

  Maine State Police. She spoke with Robin Cobb who resides on the Weir Pond Road in

  Lee, Maine. Cobb conveyed information to Wagner that ultimately resulted in Wagner

  making the following entry into the CAD Master Call Table:

         Ongoing issues w/ Brian Michaud. He called tonight and said, “Your son
         is going to pay.” He was at the res tonight looking for a girl named
         Danielle her son is dating about 15 mins ago. Left in dark blue/light blue
         pu, possibly GMC. Neighbor said she saw his veh return and drive by the
         res and heard a gun shot. Veh left and went into the woods and hasn’t
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 2 of 7                                 PageID #: 31



          come out yet. He is drunk. Compl also said she drove her car off the road
          on her way home on R6 because she was so nervous.

  (Gov't Ex. A.) Shortly thereafter Tracy Erickson, another regional dispatcher working

  alongside Wagner, radioed Michael Knights, a Penobscot County deputy who was

  working in the vicinity of Route 6 and the Weir Pond Road in Lee. Erickson told Knights

  the following:

          125, just received a call Robin Cobb, Robin Cobb. She lives at 7 Weir
          Pond Road, 7 Weir Pond Road in Lee. This is going to be in reference to
          ongoing issues with a Brian Michaud. Apparently he called tonight and
          said, "Your son is going to pay." End of quote. He was at the residence
          tonight looking for a girl by the name of Danielle that her son is dating.
          Left in a dark blue over light blue pickup about 15 minutes ago, possibly a
          GMC. Neighbor said she saw this vehicle return and drive by the
          residence and then heard a gun shot. The vehicle left again and went into
          the woods and hasn't come out yet. This complainant is also stating that
          she drove her car off the road on her way home on Route 6 because she
          was so nervous, may possibly be the 55 you were looking for.

  (Govt' Ex. D.) 1 Knights, the deputy sheriff assigned to Penobscot County’ s Zone 1, the

  vast rural area east and north of Lincoln, Maine, had already been dispatched to the area

  of Route 6 close to the Weir Pond Road because an anonymous motorist had phoned in a

  report of a motor vehicle with a broken windshield off the road in the ditch. 2 Deputy

  Knights was familiar with Robin Cobb and the location of her home, having been to the

  residence three to five times in the past. Approximately a month prior to these events he

  had gone there as back up to Trooper Fisk of the Maine State Police who was

  investigating another incident involving Michaud and Robin Cobb’s son.




  1
           The government also submitted a transcript of this communication with its response to the motion.
  (Docket No. 9, Elec. Attach. 2.) There is also a cassette audio tape available in the file.
  2
           Robin Cobb’s vehicle was the one in the ditch with the broken windshield, but she had not
  reported the accident until a later call to Peggy Wagner. At the time of these events Knights did not know
  her vehicle was the one he was dispatched to find.


                                                      2
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 3 of 7                    PageID #: 32



         As Knights was receiving the foregoing communication from Tracy Erickson a

  motor vehicle came into view that was proceeding along Route 6 away from the vicinity

  of the Cobb residence and toward the Thomas Hill Road. (See Gov’t. Ex. E.) Seeing any

  vehicle around midnight on Route 6 in this area is unusual. Knights regularly patrols the

  area and has observed that after Raymond’s Variety Store closes at 11:00 p.m. until about

  3:30 a.m. when the pulp trucks start rolling one can sit on Route 6 for over 10 minutes

  without seeing a single vehicle pass. In fact, the vehicle that appeared as Erickson spoke

  on the radio was the only other vehicle in that area of Route 6 visible to Knights. Knights

  saw that the vehicle was a pick up truck and was dark in color. Eventually he ascertained

  that the pickup was two toned and was either an older model GMC or an older model

  Chevy, two makes that are often almost identical in appearance. However, the most

  outstanding feature of the truck was a homemade tool box attached to the bed of the

  truck. Knights immediately asked the dispatcher to confirm whether the vehicle he

  sought had a toolbox on the back.

         Erickson then called Cobb to verify the existence of the toolbox. (Wagner, who

  had taken the original call, was otherwise engaged and therefore not available to confirm

  that the original description from Cobb included the toolbox. Indeed, it had.) Once

  Erickson received confirmation from Cobb she radioed confirmation to Knights.

         In the meantime events were unfolding before Knights. The truck was traveling

  west on Route 6 toward Lincoln, Maine, and Knights was a considerable distance behind

  it. At the intersection of the Thomas Hill Road the vehicle turned off Route 6 and

  proceeded up a rather steep hill. The Thomas Hill Road eventually circles around onto

  the Skunk Hill Road, not too far from Cobb’s home at the intersection of the Skunk Hill




                                               3
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 4 of 7                      PageID #: 33



  Road and Weir Pond Road. In fact, the truck was ultimately stopped only 2.4 miles from

  Robin Cobb’s home. Because the pickup was pulling away from him, Knights turned on

  his blue lights when he turned onto the Skunk Hill Road. The vehicle did not

  immediately stop and Knights became concerned that a chase might commence. He

  started to radio Erickson to ascertain the location of his nearest backup, but before he

  could say anything Erickson radioed to him that she had confirmed that the toolbox was

  on the pickup truck. (The Government played the tape of these radio broadcasts and it is

  abundantly clear that events unfolded quickly.) Knights then questioned her about

  backup and then quickly told her to disregard that request because the pickup was coming

  to a stop. Brian Michaud was identified as a passenger in the pickup and these charges

  apparently ensued.

                                           Discussion

         Michaud’s pleadings in support of his motion are terse. He merely says this stop

  and detention was effected without articulable suspicion and cites Terry v. Ohio, 392

  U.S. 1 (1968), and United States v. Kimball, 25 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 1994). There is no

  discussion of how the facts of this case might relate to the general legal principles

  contained in those cases. During oral argument following the Government’s evidentiary

  presentation, Michaud suggested that his argument contained two prongs: (1) that there

  was no reasonable, articulable suspicion of any criminal activity afoot based upon the

  information that Knights was told by his dispatch; and (2) that even if there was a

  reasonable articulable suspicion of criminal activity, it was not particularized to the

  pickup that Knights stopped and therefore the stop of the pickup violated the Fourth

  Amendment.




                                                4
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 5 of 7                    PageID #: 34



         Reasonable suspicion must be determined on a case by case basis, and that

  determination "entails broad-based consideration of all the attendant circumstances."

  United States v. Chhien, 266 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2001). A reviewing court must "make a

  practical, commonsense judgment based on the idiosyncrasies of the case at hand." Id.

  Courts deal with reasonableness determinations all the time, as Justice O’Connor has

  pointed out in the context of 28 U.S.C. § 2254:

         The term "unreasonable" is no doubt difficult to define. That said, it is a common
         term in the legal world and, accordingly, federal judges are familiar with its
         meaning. For purposes of today's opinion, the most important point is that an
         unreasonable application of federal law is different from an incorrect application
         of federal law.

  Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 362, 410 (O’Conner, J., concurring). The First Circuit,

  considering the discretion accorded federal judges in making upward departure decisions

  under the then mandatory federal sentencing guidelines, has noted "[r]easonableness is a

  concept, not a constant." United States v. Ocasio, 914 F.2d 330, 336 (1st Cir.1990).

         Applying the concept of reasonableness to the Fourth Amendment intrusion in

  this case leaves me with only one inescapable conclusion, Deputy Knights held a

  reasonable articulable suspicion that "criminal activity may be afoot," Terry, 392 U.S. at

  28, and that the pickup truck he sought to stop may be involved in that activity. Knights

  was no stranger to the Cobb/Michaud contretemps, having responded to the scene before

  and having learned of allega tions that Michaud harbored ill will toward Cobb’s son. It

  was an ongoing problem. On the night in question Knights was told by dispatch that

  Michaud had very recently made a threat against the son to his mother. Michaud was in

  the area. A neighbor had seen the truck that Michaud was associated with return to the

  vicinity of Cobb’s house and heard gunshots fired. Given that information, any police




                                               5
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 6 of 7                      PageID #: 35



  officer who did not have a reasonable articulable suspicion that criminal activity might be

  in process, including genuine concerns about violent criminal conduct, would have been

  derelict in his duties. The first prong of Michaud’s argument has no merit.

         Nor does his argument that Knights lacked any basis in reason to connect the two-

  toned pickup truck to the allegations concerning Michaud and the gun shots. Knights

  knew he was looking for a two-tone GMC pickup. Lo and behold, within one and one-

  half miles of the complainant’s residence (see Gov’t. Ex. E, Point B, the spot where

  vehicle was first sighted by Knights) he sees a pickup truck matching that description.

  He follows it. It makes a left hand turn up a road that eventually will circle back to the

  complainant’s residence. It is past midnight in a rural area where there is literally no

  traffic, no open businesses, and just not much going on except these events. Although he

  turns on the blues prior to confirming the existence of a toolbox, he confirms the

  existence of the toolbox before the suspect vehicle pulls over. If I were a betting person,

  I would place the odds well beyond 2:1 probability that this truck was the truck I was

  looking to find. The degree of certainty Deputy Knights needed to undertake the limited

  intrusion of a motor vehicle traffic stop is much lower than a preponderance of the

  evidence. Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 330 (1990) (observing that reasonable

  suspicion "is considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the

  evidence"). Deputy Knights did not violate Micha ud’s Fourth Amendment right to be

  secure against unreasonable seizures of his person or effects.

                                          Conclusion

         Based upon the foregoing, I RECOMMEND that the court adopt these findings

  of fact and DENY the motion to suppress (Docket No. 7).




                                                6
Case 1:05-cr-00035-GZS Document 13 Filed 07/25/05 Page 7 of 7                       PageID #: 36



                                            NOTICE

                 A party may file objections to those specified portions of a
         magistrate judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions
         entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by
         the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum, and
         request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within
         ten (10) days of being served with a copy thereof. A responsive
         memorandum and any request for oral argument before the district judge
         shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objectio n.

                  Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the
         right to de novo review by the district court and to appeal the district
         court’s order.



                                                 /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                                 U.S. Magistrate Judge
  Dated: July 25, 2005




                                                7
