Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 1 of 12                   PageID #: 69



                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                    )
                                            )
                                            )
                                            )
v.                                          )              CRIMINAL NO. 04-133-P-H
                                            )
JOHN FRECHETTE,                             )
                                            )
                      DEFENDANT             )


                         ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION
                            TO DISMISS INDICTMENT


       John Frechette is charged with the federal offense of possessing a firearm

after having previously been convicted in Maine state court of a 1996

misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.                Frechette moved to dismiss the

federal indictment (or, in the alternative, to suppress all evidence of his state

conviction) on the basis that in state court he was denied his right to court-

appointed counsel and not adequately advised of his right to jury trial.1

Frechette sought an evidentiary hearing in this court to present testimony

concerning his limited education and his hourly wage at the time of the 1996

state conviction.     The Magistrate Judge denied the request for an evidentiary

hearing and Frechette has appealed that ruling. But Frechette also maintains

that, according to the federal statute under which he is being prosecuted, a



1 Initially, Frechette also challenged the fairness and accuracy of the state court transcript.
But he later withdrew that challenge (explicitly at oral argument on June 1, 2005), agreeing
that the transcript attached to the government’s opposition to his motion is a fair and accurate
rendition of what occurred in state court.
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 2 of 12            PageID #: 70



federal jury must determine any factual issues concerning his preservation or

waiver of his right to jury trial and/or counsel.

      I conclude that the state court transcript furnishes an adequate record

and that no evidentiary hearing is required; that the transcript establishes that

Frechette knowingly and intelligently waived his right to counsel, but also

establishes that Frechette did not knowingly and intelligently waive his right to

jury trial; and that the plain language of the federal statute requires me to

dismiss the superseding indictment.

                                     ANALYSIS

      According to the federal statute, a person is not considered to have been

convicted of a state misdemeanor crime of domestic violence

            unless—
                   (I)    the person was represented by counsel in the
            case, or knowingly and intelligently waived the right to
            counsel in the case; and
                   (II)   in the case of a prosecution for an offense . . .
            for which a person was entitled to a jury trial in the
            jurisdiction in which the case was tried, either
                          (aa) the case was tried by a jury, or
                          (bb) the person knowingly and intelligently
                   waived the right to have the case tried by a jury, by
                   guilty plea or otherwise.

18 U.S.C. § 921 (a) (33)(B)(i). In state court, Frechette pleaded nolo, i.e., no

contest, to what is concededly a Maine crime of domestic violence. He had no

lawyer.

                                 R IGHT TO COUNSEL

      Frechette concedes that the transcript reveals that the state judge

advised him that he had a right to counsel and court-appointed counsel. His



                                                                                     2
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 3 of 12            PageID #: 71



challenge, instead, is that the state judge improperly determined that Frechette

did not qualify financially for court-appointed counsel.

      Frechette was initially arraigned on the state charge on December 13,

1995. At that time, Maine District Judge Beliveau denied Frechette’s request

for court-appointed counsel on the basis that Frechette’s income exceeded the

guidelines for court appointment. See Docket Record at 1 (Ex. to Def.’s Mot. to

Dismiss Indictment) (Docket Item 13). The case was continued for sentencing;

Frechette failed to appear; he was arrested; and his nolo plea occurred on

October 16, 1996.2     At that time, the transcript reveals, the judge told the

assembled defendants:

            The third right and the last right that I want to explain to
            everybody is your right to an attorney. If any of you are
            here and there is a probability or a possibility that you
            could be facing jail if you are convicted of the crime that
            you are being charged with here, I would advise you to get a
            lawyer or get legal advice. Also, if you can’t afford a lawyer,
            depending on your financial circumstances, you can ask me
            to appoint a lawyer at the State expense for you. Here’s
            how that happens. You let me know. I’m obviously going
            to let you know how serious the offense is and you are
            going to be asked about whether you are going to represent
            yourself, hire a lawyer, or ask for a court appointed lawyer.
            If you ask for a court appointed lawyer, you’re gonna be
            screened this morning by a financial screening officer who
            will interview you and decide whether you meet the
            guidelines for a court appointed lawyer. If you meet the
            guidelines, a lawyer will be appointed who practices within
            our jurisdiction here. It’s a private attorney. If you don’t
            qualify, that means you will have to hire your own lawyer or
            represent yourself. Please understand the case doesn’t go
            away because you don’t get a court appointed lawyer. You
            still have to face the charges. . .


Tr. at 1 (Ex. to Gov’t Objection to Def.’s Mot. to Dismiss) (Docket Item 15).


2The docket indicates that on Dece mber 13, 1995, the defendant was found “GUILTY as
charged.” The parties agree that this docket entry is incorrect.
                                                                                   3
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 4 of 12             PageID #: 72



      Later, the state judge addressed Frechette personally:

             Court:           . . . All right, Mr. Frechette, . . . you have already pled
                              Not Guilty. This was a bench warrant for not showing
                              up to your trial and you have a right to either ask for a
                              new court date if you want to do so.

             Frechette:       No.

             Court:           Do you want to change your plea?

             Frechette:       No contest.

             Court:           Do you want to change your plea to No Contest? Do you
                              understand by doing that you waive your right to trial.
                              Right?

             Frechette:       Yes.

             Court:           Your right to the advice of a lawyer? Does he get a court
                              appointed lawyer? No, he didn’t qualify. Okay. Do you
                              understand that by pleading No Contest that you waive
                              your right to trial and the advice of a lawyer? All right?

             Frechette:       Yup.

             Court:           Okay. Do you want to have him waived, please?

             Court Officer:   This is a waiver of counsel I’m going to read to you.

                               I am the person charged in this
                               proceeding. I am fully aware of my right
                               to have my attorney of my own choosing
                               or, if I am unable to afford an attorney, to
                               have an attorney appointed by the court
                               at public expense. I do not desire an
                               attorney and hereby waive my right to be
                               represented by an attorney.

                              Do you understand what I read to you, sir? Having read
                              that to you, you can sign right here, please.

Although the signed waiver no longer exists, Frechette does not contend that

he did not sign it.

      Thus, the transcript makes clear that Frechette was fully advised of his

right to court-appointed counsel. Frechette never challenged in state court the

                                                                                        4
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 5 of 12                   PageID #: 73



determination that he failed to qualify financially in either 1995 or 1996.

However, he asks me to take evidence now of his education and income in

those years.     Presumably he would have me determine that either the state

guidelines were improperly applied in 1995-96 or that they were inadequate to

meet federal constitutional standards for court appointment of counsel.

       The First Circuit has established that once the government shows the

existence of an underlying qualifying conviction (it has done so here), the

burden of proof shifts to the defendant to show that § 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(I) creates

an exception that disqualifies the conviction. United States v. Hartsock, 347

F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 2003).3          In the context of the right to court-appointed

counsel, that means that Frechette has the burden to show that the state judge

improperly found him able to afford a lawyer in October 1996 when he pled

nolo. But Frechette never told the state judge that the determination in 1995

was incorrect or that his circumstances had changed in October 1996.

Frechette was present for the judge’s speech to the assembled defendants,4

then participated in an individualized colloquy with the judge. Yet he failed to

challenge the earlier determination that he did not qualify for court

appointment, and pressed forward in his nolo plea.                 By doing so, Frechette

knowingly and willingly waived his right to counsel.5               I am skeptical that, in

enacting this federal statute, Congress intended a federal court to revisit an

3 Accord Iowa v. Tovar, 541 U.S. 77, 92 (2004) (stating, in the federal constitutional context,
that “in a collateral attack on an uncounseled conviction, it is the defendant’s burden to prove
that he did not competently and intelligently waive his right to the assistance of counsel”).
4 There is no indication that Frechette was not present, and although he correctly notes that

the transcript does not affirmatively demonstrate his presence, he has not made any proffer
that he was not there.
5 Put another way, what was the state judge to do?     Frechette gave the court no idea that he
disagreed with the determination that he could afford a lawyer.
                                                                                               5
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 6 of 12                PageID #: 74



indigency determination ten years after the fact, and recreate incomes and

expenditures, assets and liabilities, and measure them against the costs of

legal   representation     ten   years    earlier   for   quintessentially    state   court

proceedings.     But even if that is the consequence of the legislation, given

Hartsock’s assignment of the burden of proof, Frechette’s proffer is inadequate

to meet the exception or even require an evidentiary hearing.                See Hartsock,

347 F.3d at 8-9 (holding that the defendant bears the burden of production

and persuasion on this affirmative defense).               Frechette proffers only his

schooling and his hourly wage. An hourly wage alone provides no information

about other assets that might have been available to Frechette in 1996, and I

have no information about the 1996 cost of legal services in Lewiston, Maine

for resisting the fairly simple state charge to which Frechette pleaded nolo. I

conclude that even with his limited education (failure to complete high school),

Frechette has failed to meet his burden of proof that his waiver was not

knowing and intelligent or to support his request for an evidentiary hearing in

the face of the clear record from the transcript.6

        Although the First Circuit has left open the question whether this is a

jury issue, it also recognized that every other Circuit has found it to be a

question for the judge. Hartsock, 347 F.3d at 4 & n.3. I follow the unanimous

rule, and conclude that there is no jury issue, and that as a matter of law,

Frechette knowingly and intelligently waived his right to counsel.


6 In Hartsock, the First Circuit remanded for an evidentiary hearing because there was no
transcript. Here, there is a transcript. I recognize that after Hartsock, Magistrate Judge
Kravchuk has conducted evidentiary hearings in other cases where there appear to have been
transcripts. The opinions do not reveal why she found it necessary to convene a hearing in
those cases and I do not find them to be authority for holding an evidentiary hearing here.
                                                                                            6
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 7 of 12                     PageID #: 75



       Frechette also argues that wholly apart from the federal statute, his state

conviction violated his Sixth Amendment constitutional right to counsel, a right

that he is free to assert in this later attack. See Custis v. United States, 511

U.S. 485 (1994). But according to Hartsock, when Congress made domestic

violence misdemeanants prohibited persons in 1996, “no constitutionally

recognized right to counsel then existed for misdemeanor convictions that did

not actually lead to imprisonment.” Hartsock, 347 F.3d at 5. Frechette’s 1996

misdemeanor conviction did not lead to imprisonment.                  Instead, he received a

30-day suspended sentence and one year’s probation.7 According to Hartsock,

therefore, Frechette had no Sixth Amendment right to court-appointed counsel

at his nolo plea in 1996, regardless of his financial condition. And even if he

did have such a right, I conclude for the reasons stated above that he

knowingly and intelligently waived the right.

                                  R IGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY

       Because Frechette pleaded nolo in state court, he had no jury trial. It is

undisputed that he “was entitled to a jury trial in the jurisdiction in which the

case    was     tried,”   namely      in   Maine      state   court.8        See    18    U.S.C.


7 A few months later Frechette violated probation, and then was sentenced to 13 days
intermittent confinement in the county jail, with a complete termination of probation. Exh. to
Mot. Dismiss.
8 In 1995 and 1996, both Maine and federal constitutional law conferred a jury trial right on

Frechette for his misdemeanor domestic violence crime. The Maine Constitution provided: “In
all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall have a right . . . To have a speedy, public and
impartial trial, and, except in trials by martial law or impeachment, by a jury of the vicinity.”
Me. Const. art. 1, § 6. A criminal defendant in Maine state court in 1995 and 1996 was
entitled to a jury trial even for offenses that could be characterized as “petty.” State v. Sklar,
317 A.2d 160, 170-71 (Me. 1974). Under the Fourteenth Amendment, the federal right to jury
trial in state court trial by jury did not extend to “petty offenses,” Duncan v. Louisiana, 391
U.S. 145, 159 (1968), but an offense carrying an authorized sentence of more than six months
imprisonment was a serious offense, not a petty one. In 1995 and 1996, a Class D crime like
Frechette’s was punishable by a term of imprisonment of less than one year, 17-A M.R.S.A.
                                                                                                 7
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 8 of 12                    PageID #: 76



§ 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(II).    The question is whether Frechette “knowingly and

intelligently      waived”       his      Maine        jury      trial     right.           See

18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(II)(bb).9

       I conclude that, just as the right to a jury trial is measured by the law of

the jurisdiction in which the case was tried (in Frechette’s case, Maine law), the

knowing and intelligent waiver of the right to jury trial is also to be evaluated

using the law of that jurisdiction. First, that is the common sense reading of

the statute. Second, it is a logical application of the statute. If a state can

determine that the jury trial right is so important that it extends to more cases

than the federal constitution requires, as this federal statute allows, then that

state (here, Maine) should also be able to determine the standards for waiving

the state-articulated right.        Third, although this is a federal prosecution, it

would not be appropriate to apply a “federal” standard to the jury trial waiver

as the prosecution urges here.             The “federal” standard requires a written

waiver, Fed. R. Crim. P. 23(a)(1), a procedure not contemplated by the Maine

state procedure. Theoretically I could apply constitutional rules for what is a

knowing and intelligent waiver, but there is no apparent reason to apply a

federal constitutional standard to a right whose contours are – according to the

federal statute – created and defined by state law. I conclude, therefore, that

Maine’s jury trial waiver standard should apply to the Maine right to jury

trial.10


§ 1252 (1995), thereby implicating the federal constitutional right to trial by jury.
9 The statute says that a knowing and intelligent waiver can be “by guilty plea or otherwise.” It

is uncontested that Frechette’s nolo plea fits the “or otherwise” requirement if the waiver was
knowing and intelligent.
10 The parties have not argued whether Frechette waived his federal constitutional right to jury

                                                                                                8
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 9 of 12                   PageID #: 77



        In 1996, Maine law provided that the mass arraignment procedure used

in Frechette’s case did not adequately inform a defendant of his jury trial right.

State v. Rowell, 468 A.2d 1005 (Me. 1983).11 In Rowell, the Maine Law Court

held:

        [T]he mass instruction to an unidentified group present in the
        courtroom by itself is not enough to discharge the obligation [to
        inform the defendant of his right to a trial by jury] and to justify an
        inference of a voluntary and intelligent waiver [by failing to demand
        a jury trial within 21 days following the arraignment]. The right to
        a jury belongs to the individual defendant; only he, after being fully
        advised, can be considered to have waived it by doing nothing for
        21 days. It is incumbent upon District Court judges in conducting
        arraignments to take affirmative steps reasonably de signed to
        make each defendant himself aware of his individual right to a jury
        trial and of the demand that he must make within 21 days if he is
        to avoid a binding inference of waiver.

468 A.2d at 1007-08 (emphasis in original). Although the nature of the waiver

in Rowell was waiver by inaction, rather than waiver by a plea, the Law Court

made clear that it was articulating a standard for what was required to notify a

defendant of the jury trial right:

        We do not mean to suggest that a mass instruction may not be
        used as a proper part of the process [of informing the defendant of
        the right to a trial by jury]. Standing alone, however, it is
        inadequate to establish that an individual defendant understood it,
        or even heard it.

Id. at 1007 n.3.

        Based on the transcript available to me, which the parties agree is

accurate, it is plain that Frechette was not individually advised of his right to a

jury trial, as Rowell required. Therefore, under Maine state law, his waiver of


trial, but I conclude that he did for the reasons stated in text at the end of this section.
11 I rely on Rowell because it represents the state of the law in 1996, when the defendant was

arraigned. The Law Court has recently confirmed the vitality of Rowell. See State v. Holmes,
818 A.2d 1054 (Me. 2003).
                                                                                                 9
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 10 of 12                   PageID #: 78



that right was not “voluntary and intelligent.”               Because Frechette did not

effectively waive his Maine right to a jury trial, I conclude that he did not

“knowingly and intelligently waive[] his right to a have the case tried to a jury”

for the purposes of 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(II).

       If I am wrong, and the “knowing and intelligent” standard of

§ 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(II) is to be governed only by federal constitutional law, I would

conclude that Frechette did knowingly and intelligently waive his right to a jury

trial. Under federal constitutional law, “whether or not there is an intelligent,

competent, self-protecting waiver of jury trial by an accused must depend on

the unique circumstances of each case.”              Adams v. United States, 317 U.S.

269, 278 (1942).          The transcript demonstrates here that at the mass

arraignment session, a group of defendants was advised of the right to “a trial

by a judge or jury,” and of how to exercise that right by pleading not guilty and

submitting a written request within three weeks of the arraignment. Although

Frechette points out that the transcript does not show affirmatively that he was

present at the mass arraignment or that he heard and understood the judge’s

monologue, he has not made any proffer that he was not present to hear about

his right to a jury trial and how to exercise it. Since the burden of proof is on

Frechette under the federal standard, I conclude that he did hear the mass

warning and nevertheless told the judge that he wanted to plead nolo.12

Therefore, Frechette has not carried his burden of showing that he failed to



12Frechette’s legal memoranda can be read to assert that he might have had sound defenses to
the state charge. The issue here, however, is the validity of his jury trial waiver, not whether
he made a good decision in pleading nolo.
                                                                                              10
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 11 of 12        PageID #: 79



knowingly and intelligently waive – as defined by federal constitutional

standards – his right to a trial by jury.



                                  CONCLUSION

      Because Frechette’s waiver of his right to jury trial was ineffective under

Maine    law,    he    meets    the    exception   set    forth   in   18    U.S.C.

§ 921(a)(33)(B)(i)(II)(bb). As a result, the federal statute declares that Frechette

“shall not be considered to have been convicted of [a misdemeanor crime of

domestic violence].” 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(33)(B)(i). Therefore, Frechette’s motion

to dismiss the federal indictment is GRANTED. His objection to the Magistrate

Judge’s Order denying him an evidentiary hearing is OVERRULED.



      SO ORDERED.

      DATED THIS 10TH DAY OF JUNE, 2005




                                             /s/D. Brock Hornby
                                             D. B ROCK HORNBY
                                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                                                                 11
Case 2:04-cr-00133-DBH Document 38 Filed 06/10/05 Page 12 of 12              PageID #: 80



U.S. DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF M AINE (PORTLAND )
CRIMINAL DOCKET FOR CASE #: 04 CR 133



United States of America                Represented By Darcie N. McElwee
                                                       Office Of The U.S. Attorney
                                                       District Of Maine
                                                       P.O. Box 9718
                                                       Portland, ME 04104-5018
                                                       (207) 780-3257
                                                       email: darcie.mcelwee@usdoj.gov




v.



John Frechette                          Represented By John Paul DeGrinney
                                                       DeGrinney Law Offices
     Defendant                                         1266 Congress Street
                                                       Portland, ME 04102
                                                       (207) 756-8557
                                                       Email: jplaw@maine.rr.com




                                                                                         12
