          Case 1:04-cr-10342-NG Document 24 Filed 07/07/06 Page 1 of 5



                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                    FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,            )
                                     )
     v.                              )    Crim. Docket No. 04-10342-NG
                                     )
GARY J. ADAMS,                       )
     Defendant.                      )
GERTNER, D.J.

                ORDER RE: DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS
                              July 7, 2006


     On August 13, 2004, Officer Michael Paillant (“Paillant”)

received a call at 7:45 p.m. reporting that there were about

eight individuals selling drugs on the corner of Corbett and

Hopkins Streets in Dorchester, Massachusetts.            The description

could not have been more generic: “white t-shirts and hats turned

backward.” (Paillant agreed that that description would cover 75%

of the Boston youth population.)         Paillant also noted that the

description might have included the words “black males.”

Paillant went to the scene with Officer Douglas McGrath

(“McGrath”).      The two observed the individuals who, along with

numbers of others, met the description, but they saw no drug

dealing.     Instead, they observed that the individuals were

carrying open bottles of alcohol and drinking.            The individuals

were between a chain link fence (surrounding an abandoned lot)

and two parked cars, a BMW and an Acura Integra (“Acura”).

     The officers parked their unmarked car “in the middle of the

street” and identified themselves as police officers.             They
        Case 1:04-cr-10342-NG Document 24 Filed 07/07/06 Page 2 of 5



approached Gary Adams, the defendant, whom they did not know.

They told him to put the beer bottle down, and he did.             They

asked for his name so they could to do a “field investigation”

report, and “pat frisked him for safety.”          The pat frisk was

initiated because the officers reported that there had been

several “shootings and/or murders” in the area, although the last

incident had been two weeks prior to the Adams arrest.

      The officers called for backup to question the men.              They

did so because the two officers were “outnumbered.”            In fact, no

guns or drugs had been found on any of the individuals.             There

was no report of shootings tied to this group in general, or to

Adams in particular.      From outward appearances, nothing was

happening other than a group of young men talking and drinking

beer on a corner.     Other officers arrived and surrounded the men.

      The frisk of Adams may well have been problematic,1 but

nothing came of it.      Paillant then turned his attention to the

BMW and the Acura parked nearby.           Neither officer testified that

there was any connection between the individuals who were

drinking and the cars.      No prior “tip” linked the cars with any

illegal activity.     The Acura was illegally parked.




       1
         While public drinking is an arrestable offense incident to which the
officer could have searched, Adams was frisked before he was arrested.
Paillant had no reasonable suspicion that Adams was armed and dangerous.
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 30 (1968); United States v. Proctor, 148 F.3d 39,
42 (1st Cir. 1998).

                                     -2-
        Case 1:04-cr-10342-NG Document 24 Filed 07/07/06 Page 3 of 5



      Paillant, however, “happened to look inside of [the Acura]”

and, “from the outside” he could see several CDs:

            Q.    Did you see anything else when you looked in?
            A.    From looking through the driver's side window and
                  from the driver's side windshield for the left
                  side, I could see what appeared to be a firearm
                  from the front seat.
            Q.    And where was it?
            A.    A portion of it was sticking out from the bottom
                  of the front seat.

He made these observations at 7:53 p.m., without a flashlight.

(The sun had set at 7:48 p.m.)        He notified two other officers of

what he had seen.     Paillant then asked the individuals on the

corner: “Whose car is this?”        No one answered.     Paillant opened

the car door, which was unlocked, got on his hands and knees and

looked underneath the seat and saw a revolver and some marijuana.

He closed the car door and notified the other officers.             Adams

was then arrested for “drinking in public.”2          Another individual

who had a bottle in his hand was not arrested; Officer Paillant

indicated that he did not catch this “other” person in time.              In

any event, the officers agreed that they were going to “arrest

anybody that [they] could find any infraction on.”

      Paillant’s observation that the gun could be seen from

outside the car was confirmed by two other officers.            Later,

patrol supervisor Robert Lyden confirmed the observations, this


      2
        The testimony is inconsistent as to when Adams was arrested. Officer
Paillant indicated that Adams was arrested when he was seen with a beer bottle
in his hand some time after Paillant had looked into the car and seen the gun.
Officer Lyden, who came on the scene after the initial wave of officers, noted
that Adams was arrested after he indicated that the gun in the car was his.

                                     -3-
         Case 1:04-cr-10342-NG Document 24 Filed 07/07/06 Page 4 of 5



time with a flashlight trained on the inside of the car from

outside the window.

     Adams was given Miranda warnings after his arrest.            Officer

Paillant reported that after he saw the gun, ran the Acura’s

plates, and “mirandized” Adams, he asked the defendant if his

father was a police officer who worked in Brighton.            Adams

responded that he was.      Paillant noted that Adams “then made

reference to, did we find something inside the vehicle?            And he

made a reference to the vehicle belonging to him, but I guess it

was registered in the father's name.”         Paillant added that Adams

“made a reference to -- saying that it was his gun and he didn't

want his –- don't get his father involved, involved in this.”

Adams’ father was indeed a police officer.

     Adams was put in a cruiser; Officer Lyden after

“mirandizing” him again, asked “do you know what’s in the car?”

Adams said “yes.”      And then Lyden asked “do you have a permit for

that?”    Adams said “no.”     Adams was taken away, and the officers

seized the firearm, which was loaded, and nine bags of marijuana.

     The defendant has moved to suppress the fruits of the

search, a motion which pivots on whether I credit the testimony

of the officers (a) about their observations of the gun inside

the car, and (b) about Adams’ unsolicited remarks to Paillant and

solicited remarks to Lyden, acknowledging that the gun was his




                                     -4-
            Case 1:04-cr-10342-NG Document 24 Filed 07/07/06 Page 5 of 5



and that he had no permit.          I credit the testimony of the

officers on both fronts.

        I credit Paillant’s testimony that he saw a gun sticking out

from under the seat of the Acura because it was corroborated by

three officers.        While Paillant did not have the authority to

open the car door and put his head under the seat to get a better

view, his acts in doing so are without legal consequence in this

case.3      He closed the door immediately; three other officers

confirmed his observations from outside of the car.

        I also credit the testimony of Officers Paillant and Lyden

that Adams acknowledged that the gun was his, and Officer Lyden’s

testimony that Adams admitted he had no permit.              At that point,

the police had the right to seize the gun from the car, and, if

they had not already done so, arrest Adams on possession of an

unlicenced gun.

        Therefore, Defendant’s Motion to Suppress (document #19) is

DENIED.

SO ORDERED.

Date:       July 7, 2006               /s/NANCY GERTNER, U.S.D.J.


        3
        Under ordinary circumstances, the plain view exception permits the
warrantless seizure of an object provided that (1) the officer is lawfully
positioned in a place from which the object can be plainly viewed; (2) the
incriminating character of the object is immediately apparent; and, (3) the
officer has a lawful right of access to the object itself. Horton v.
California, 496 U.S. 128, 136-37 (1990); United States v. Paradis, 351 F.3d
21, 31 (1st Cir. 2003). In the instant case the officer was lawfully
positioned, on the outside of the car. He had no right to go inside of it.
The gun was not immediately incriminating. It could well have been lawfully
possessed.

                                        -5-
