    Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 1 of 8                                  PageID #: 93



                                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                            DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                             )
                                                      )
         v.                                           )        Crim. No. 5-73-B-JAW
                                                      )
CHRISTOPHER SMITH,                                    )
                                                      )
                           Defendant.                 )


                 RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS
               AND SUPPLEMENTAL MOTION TO SUPPRESS AND DISMISS

         Christopher Smith is currently charged in a one-count indictment with violating Sections

922(a)(6) and 924(a)(2) of Title 18 of the United States Code, by knowingly making a false

statement on ATF Form 4473 in connection with an attempt to purchase a handgun, when he

answered "No" to a question regarding whether he had ever been committed to a mental

institution. Smith has filed two pretrial motions. The first motion seeks suppression of police

reports obtained from the Bangor Police Department and a "blue paper"1 disclosed to the

Government by Acadia Hospital pursuant to an order of this Court. The second motion is a

supplemental motion to suppress the blue paper application and it also requests dismissal of the

charges as a sanction for the Government's alleged violation of Section 290dd-2 of Title 42 of

the United States Code and regulations promulgated thereunder pertaining to the confidentiality

of alcohol and drug abuse patient records. I recommend the Court adopt the following factual

statement and deny both motions.



1
         Pursuant to Maine law an application for involuntary commitment is made through a three-part process,
requiring the signatures of three separate endorsers: an applicant, a certifying examiner, and a judicial officer. See
34-B M.R.S.A. § 3863. The form used to complete this process is commonly blue in color, hence it is referred to as
a "blue paper."
    Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 2 of 8                                     PageID #: 94



                                             FACTUAL S TATEMENT2

         On July 20, 2005, Erik Tall, a Bangor police detective assigned to an ATF Task Force,

received an ATF Form 4473 completed in the name of and signed by Christopher Smith (d/o/b:

8/5/84). The Form 4473 was received from Orlando Frati FFL d/b/a Frati the Pawnbrokers at 55

State Street in Bangor, Maine. On the form, Mr. Smith indicated that he wanted to purchase a

handgun. (Tall Aff. ¶ 1, Docket No. 24, Ex. A.) Smith did not, however, indicate that he had

been previously involuntarily committed. (Id. ¶ 3.) On July 20, 2005, Tall reviewed computer

records maintained by the Bangor Police Department and, based on his review of those records,

he determined that Smith had been "transported" by two Bangor police officers on April 2, 2005.

(Id. ¶ 4.) On July 20, 2005, Tall obtained a copy of a Bangor Police Department report that was

prepared by Officer Russell Twaddell on April 2, 2005. The report indicated that Smith was

transported from Eastern Maine Medical Center (EMMC) to Acadia Hospital for involuntary

committal. Attached to the report was an EMMC inpatient face sheet completed in the name of

Christopher Smith. (Id. ¶ 5.)




2
        The Government presented as its factual record the affidavit of Officer Erik Tall, which was submitted to me
in support of the Government's Motion for Disclosure of Commitment Records and to Seal in connection with grand
jury proceedings, and a sealed copy of the commitment paper, a/k/a the "blue paper." (See Doc. No. 24, Ex. A &
B.) I have adopted those facts as the only facts necessary for resolution of this motion. I agree with the Government
that there has been no factual showing that any material facts are in dispute regarding what Officer Tall did to obtain
the Order of Disclosure. The questions presented by these motions are issues of law. In response to the
Government's position that no evidentiary hearing is warranted, defendant submitted the following:

         Mr. Smith need not make factual showing to obtain suppression hearing where facts supporting
         motion to suppress are provided by the government in discovery. The documents and testimony
         that support Mr. Smith’s suppression arguments were provided by the government through
         discovery. As such, it makes little sense for the government to insist on defense affidavits,
         especially where, as in this case, the evidence at issue is central to the government’s case at trial.

(Def.'s Reply at 1-2, Docket No. 29.) I am not sure if the defendant is suggesting that an evidentiary hearing is
warranted or not. To the extent he is arguing that he is entitled to have this motion decided upon its merits, I agree
with him. To the extent he is suggesting that an evidentiary hearing should be convened, I fail to see the point.



                                                            2
Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 3 of 8                      PageID #: 95



       On July 25, 2005, Tall interviewed Smith’s mother, Linda McBrearity. Ms. McBrearity

stated that Smith was involuntarily committed to Acadia Hospital in April 2005 for a period of

two weeks. (Id. ¶ 6.) Later that day Tall met with Smith, who acknowledged that he had been

involuntarily committed to Acadia Hospital in April of 2005. (Id. ¶ 7.)

       On August 19, 2005, the Government filed its Motion for Disclosure of Commitment

Records and to Seal in which it sought disclosure of the blue paper authorizing the defendant’s

involuntary commitment to Acadia Hospital in April 2005. (Ex. A.) I granted the Government’s

motion that same day. (Id.) A copy of the Order was served on Acadia Hospital and on August

30, 2005, the Government received a copy of Smith's blue paper reflecting his April 2, 2005,

involuntary commitment. (Ex. B (submitted under seal).)

                                           DISCUSSION

A.     The Motion to Suppress

       Smith's motion to suppress is based upon the argument that agent Tall violated state law,

specifically 34-B M.R.S.A. § 1207(4), when he reviewed computer records and police reports

related to transporting Smith from EMMC to Acadia Hospital for involuntary committal.

Subsection four makes it a Class D crime to violate any of the confidentiality provisions within §

1207. Section 1207(1) reads:

       1. GENERALLY. All orders of commitment, medical and administrative
       records, applications and reports, and facts contained in them, pertaining to any
       client shall be kept confidential and may not be disclosed by any person . . . .

Section 1207 then lists exceptions to that general rule, but, argues Smith, none of the exceptions

have any applicability to the police reports and computer records reviewed by Tall. In Smith's

view, although in this case the application for commitment with its judicial endorsement was

obtained pursuant to a court order on the Government's motion for disclosure, one of the




                                                 3
    Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 4 of 8                               PageID #: 96



enumerated exceptions, id. § 1207(1)(C), Tall had already violated the statute by using the

Bangor Police Department's report and records to obtain that order from me, which tainted the

subsequent court order.

         The legal basis for Smith's argument is not that Tall violated the Fourth Amendment.

Rather he relies upon United States v. Sutherland, 929 F.2d 765 (1st Cir. 1991), and its progeny,

United States v. Wilson, 36 F.3d 205 (1st Cir. 1994), a curious pair of cases to cite in support of

his proposition that suppression of the police report and records and the resulting involuntary

commitment application is warranted. Wilson simply acknowledged that Sutherland leaves room

for the court to exercise its supervisory powers to exclude evidence where federal officials seek

to capitalize on an "extreme case of flagrant abuse of the law" by state law enforcement

officials. 3 Wilson, 36 F.3d at 208. Neither case actually ordered that evidence seized in

violation of state law be suppressed.

         In Sutherland we learn that under Massachusetts law the warrantless interception of oral

and wire communications is prohibited absent consent of all the parties. 929 F.2d at 769. The

Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that engaging in warrantless surveillance violates

the right of privacy protected by the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights, even though it does

not violate the federal Constitution. Id. (citing Commonwealth v. Blood, 507 N.E.2d 1029,

1032-35 (Mass. 1987)). Tape recordings therefore cannot be used as substantive evidence in

Massachusetts prosecutions pursuant to a state, judicially crafted, exclusionary rule. Id. As a

3
         At one point in his initial memorandum Smith argues this case is distinguishable from Wilson because this
case involves a federal investigator who "violated State law as an accessory to the Bangor Police disclosure of the
reports." (Docket No. 21 at 4.) However, Tall states in the opening paragraph of his affidavit: "I am a Detective
with the Bangor, Maine Police Department and am currently assigned as a Task Force Officer with the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives." I am not convinced that his hybrid status changes the analysis under
Wilson and Sutherland. Smith does not explain in his memorandum why the distinction makes a difference and it is
not readily apparent to me why Tall's status as a "federal" law enforcement officer, to the extent he could be so
considered, would impact the analysis in a way favorable to Smith. Both Wilson and Sutherland make clear that
"[e]vidence obtained in violation of neither the Constitution nor federal law is admissible without regard to state
law." Wilson, 36 F.3d at 208 (quoting Sutherland, 929 F.2d at 769) (emphasis added).


                                                         4
 Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 5 of 8                       PageID #: 97



result of an appeal from an in limine order entered against one of Sutherland's co-defendants

named Fini, the Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled that the taped conversations could not even

be used for impeachment purposes. In the face of that ruling the state dismissed its charges and

Sutherland, Fini, and a third defendant were indicted by a federal grand jury. The First Circuit

Court of Appeals went to considerable lengths to explain the non-applicability of the so called

"silver platter" exception doctrine, wherein a federal court dismisses a federal prosecution

because of a violation of state law by state law enforcement officers. Id. at 771 ("We write here

to clarify that, in this circuit, there is no such exception. We prefer this approach to forcing

courts into intricate analytical maneuvers to escape a poorly conceived exception.").

       If the facts of Sutherland did not give rise to a case of "flagrant abuse," then this case

certainly does not. First, as the Government notes in its memorandum, there is an argument

about whether § 1207, located in a chapter pertaining to the Department of Mental Health and

Retardation, and relating to control of the conduct of state institutions and related community

agencies providing services to the mentally ill, has any application at all to police agencies

engaged in the process of responding to calls for assistance regarding preadmission

transportation of individuals. Second, no Maine court anywhere, in any reported decision I could

find, has ever held that a violation of § 1207 would result in the suppression of evidence in a

criminal proceeding. Nor is there a state statutory provision regarding the exclusion of such

evidence from criminal proceedings. Even assuming that Tall violated the confidentiality

prohibition by using the information in the police report to obtain the federal court order, there is

no reason to presume that the State of Maine would craft a state exclusionary rule in criminal

proceedings against Smith. Thus, this case does not even begin to approach the factual scenario

of Sutherland, which was itself insufficient to support a finding of "flagrant abuse." I can find no




                                                  5
    Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 6 of 8                                  PageID #: 98



legal basis for suppressing the police report and records or the blue paper because of an alleged

violation of state law.

B.       Supplemental Motion to Suppress and Motion to Dismiss

         Smith's supple mental motion to suppress or dismiss is grounded on federal regulations

rather than state law. Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 290dd-2 and the regulations promulgated

thereunder, alcohol and drug abuse records are confidential and can only be made subject to

disclosure by a court order under certain circumstances. In this case Smith claims that the copy

of the emergency involuntary admission application was provided in violation of federal

regulation because the application describes the reason for the requested admission as an

"amphetamine overdosed psychosis" and the Government did not obtain a court order that

complied with the applicable regulations. 4 Of course, when the Government filed the motion to

obtain a court order regarding the application for commitment, neither it nor this Court had any

reason to know that drug abuse information would appear in the application. If the release of

information pertaining to drug abuse on the blue paper application is a violation of the federal

regulation, the Maine state Probate Judge who endorsed the application was also a recipient of

the same confidential information in violation of the federal regulation. It seems unlikely to me


4
          The parties expend some ink discussing whether or not the charge in this case, providing false information
on a federal firearms application, is a "serious crime" within the regulatory definition. The regulations provide that
a court may order disclosure of patient records when "[t]he crime involved is extremely serious, such as one which
causes or directly threatens loss of life or serious bodily injury including homicide, rape, kidnapping, armed robbery,
assault with a deadly weapon, and child abuse and neglect." See 42 C.F.R. § 2.65(d)(1). The Government did not
seek this court order under that regulation and I did not issue the order for disclosure in reliance upon any
determination that I made under that regulation. The Government moved for disclosure of the application and
related court orders pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1651 ("All-Writs Act"), 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(a)(1) (the HIPAA
regulations), and applicable state law. As the magistrate judge who issued the order upon which the hospital and the
Government apparently relied in good faith, I note that I never for one moment considered whether the application
might mention the word "drugs" and therefore became a patient record within in the meaning of 42 C.F.R. §
2.65(d). As I am not persuaded that state court emergency commitment applications become patient records within
the meaning of 42 U.S.C. § 290dd-2, I see no reason to make a determination now whether this alleged crime is
sufficiently "serious" to fit within the regulation. In any event if I, as the magistrate judge who issued the order of
disclosure, erred as a matter of law under 42 C.F.R. § 2.65 (d)(1), suppression or dismissal of the charges is not the
remedy as is established by the cases cited by the Government and discussed herein.


                                                          6
 Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 7 of 8                       PageID #: 99



that a state court-authorized form for involuntary commitment is the type of drug abuse treatment

"record" contemplated by the federal regulation and therefore I think the federal regulation has

no applicability to this case.

         However, if I accept Smith's premise that the involuntary committal application is

covered by the regulations he cites, the fact remains that absent a constitutional violation, a

violation of a statute or regulation does not generally entitle a criminal defendant to the

suppression of evidence unless that statute or regulation provides for such a remedy. United

States v. Li, 206 F.3d 56, 61 (1st Cir. 2000); see also United States v. Thompson, 936 F.2d 1249,

1252 (11th Cir. 1991) (“Absent a specific reference to an exclusionary rule, it is not appropriate

for the courts to read such a provision into [an] act.”); United States v. Kington, 801 F.2d 733,

737 (5th Cir. 1986) (asserting that rights created by Congress are not enforceable by suppression

unless Congress has specifically provided for that remedy). The same is true with respect to

ordering the dismissal of an indictment based upon a violation of a statute or an act. Li, 206 F.3d

at 62.

         Finally, Smith argues that any statements he made to Erik Tall must be suppressed

because his knowledge that he had been involuntarily committed could only have come from his

review of his own drug treatment records and, thus, his oral statements are likewise a violation of

the confidentiality regulations. There is no evidentiary basis in this record to support that factual

assertion, but assuming for one moment that the factual assertion is true, the Government does

not seek to use Smith's drug treatment records to substantiate a criminal prosecution in violation

of the drug abuse confidentiality rules. The only relevant statement made by Smith was his

acknowledgement to Tall tha t he had been involuntarily committed. The reason for the

commitment, whether drug abuse or some other cause, does not substantiate the criminal charge




                                                  7
Case 1:05-cr-00073-JAW Document 43 Filed 01/06/06 Page 8 of 8                       PageID #: 100



under investigation by the Government. Thus, the use of Smith's voluntary statement regarding

the mere fact of his involuntary commitment does not run afoul of 42 C.F.R. § 2.23(b)'s

prohibition against using a patient's own access to his records to initiate or substantiate criminal

charges or to conduct a criminal investigation of the patient. The Government does not need any

statement from Smith regarding his drug abuse to substantiate the charge in this case. There is

no reason to suppress his oral acknowledgement that he was committed to a mental institution.



                                            Conclusion

       Based upon the foregoing I recommend the court DENY both the motion to suppress

(Docket No. 21) and the supplemental motion to suppress and motion to dismiss (Docket No.

23).

                                              NOTICE

                A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
       judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
       28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
       together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
       district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
       thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
       district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.



                                               /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                               U.S. Magistrate Judge
Dated: January 6, 2006




                                                  8
