      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 1 of 13



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


                                     )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA             )
                                     )
             v.                      )     CRIMINAL ACTION NO.
                                     )     05-10358-PBS
ANTONIO SANTOS,                      )
                  Defendant.         )
                                     )

                         MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

                           January 17, 2007

Saris, U.S.D.J.

                               I. INTRODUCTION

     On June 16, 2005 Taunton Police seized evidence from the

apartment of defendant Antonio Santos pursuant to a search

warrant.    Santos moves for a Franks Hearing and moves to suppress

all evidence derived from the search, alleging that the warrant

affidavit made material misrepresentations and that the resulting

warrant lacked sufficient particularity.         After hearing oral

argument, I DENY the motion for Franks hearing and to suppress
evidence.

                               II. BACKGROUND

     On June 16, 2005 Taunton Police Detective Edward Pearson

filed an application for a state warrant to search 19 Harrison

Avenue in Taunton.    Included with the application were Detective

Pearson’s affidavit, a copy of the Board of Probation criminal

history for Santos, the search warrant and the warrant return.

The application detailed Pearson’s law enforcement training and
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 2 of 13



experience, and the facts that he relied upon to establish

probable cause which were acquired from four main sources.

     First, as explained in his affidavit, Pearson acquired much

of the information from a confidential informant (“CI”) who had

supposed familiarity with Santos’s drug trafficking activities.

Pearson detailed the reliability of the CI, established by the

arrests of or indictments against several named individuals.           The

CI reported that it purchased crack cocaine at 19 Harrison Avenue

from a person known as “T” who drove a gray Honda Civic.           The CI

agreed to make a controlled buy for Pearson, which was completed

sometime between June 13 and June 16, 2005.        Pearson watched the

CI enter 19 Harrison Avenue for the controlled buy, and the CI

returned to Pearson with crack cocaine.        The CI confirmed that

“T” sold the CI the crack cocaine, “T” is a black male with an

Afro type hairdo tied in a bun, and “T” drives a gray Honda Civic

which is parked at 19 Harrison Avenue.

     Second, Pearson reported that the CI’s information was

corroborated by nearby residents.       The Taunton Police had

received numerous calls from neighbors complaining of “drug

activity” by “a black man with bushy hair tied in the back.”

Several callers also indicated that the dealer operated the Honda

Civic parked in front of 19 Harrison Avenue.

     Third, Pearson indicated that “T” had been identified as

Santos.   The identification was made with the assistance of

Taunton Police Officer Jeffrey Martin.       Martin was able to stop

                                    2
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 3 of 13



the Honda Civic for a defective taillight, at which time the

driver produced an identification card identifying himself as

Antonio Santos.    Because the car was stopped nearby, the officer

then watched Santos enter the dwelling at 19 Harrison Avenue.

Pearson’s affidavit also summarized the attached criminal history

record, noting that Santos had a “15 item criminal history

consisting of 4 counts of possession of a class D substance, 2

counts of possession with intent to distribute a class D

controlled substance, and one count of unlawful possession of a

firearm.”

     Finally, Pearson referenced police surveillance of 19

Harrison Avenue.   During surveillance, several “known drug

addicts” were observed entering the building and exiting minutes

later in a manner consistent with drug traffic.         Santos was also

observed “keeping watch” out of his second floor window.

     Based on the application, on June 16, 2005 a clerk

magistrate of Taunton District Court issued the search warrant to

Pearson.    Although Pearson’s affidavit described the premises to

be searched as “19 Harrison Ave 2nd floor,” the actual warrant

refers only to 19 Harrison Avenue, which it says “consists of 2

floors and a cellar.”    There is also no mention of Santos’s

roommate, Jason Glass, who jointly rented the apartment with

Santos and used one of the bedrooms.

     The dwelling at 19 Harrison Avenue was in fact a two family

home, with an apartment on each floor.       The first floor was

                                    3
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 4 of 13



occupied by the landlord and property owner, Daniel Salamone, and

his family.   Santos and Glass rented the second floor apartment.

Both apartments were accessible only through a common front door

which remained locked.

     On June 16, 2005 Pearson accompanied other Taunton police

officers to 19 Harrison Avenue to execute the search warrant.

The police gained entry to the building and the second floor

apartment using keys recovered from Santos during a traffic stop

for driving with a suspended license.       The officers entered only

the second floor apartment.     Inside the living room, they

recovered a .22 caliber pistol, two digital scales and a scanner.

In the bedrooms, they found a citation issued to Santos, an AK 47

with a loaded ammunition clip, copies of a suppression motion

filed by Santos, a bank passbook in Santos’s name, a baggie

containing six .22 caliber bullets, an empty 30-round banana

clip, two Chinese fighting stars, $220 in cash, Santos’s

identification card, and a pair of jeans in the closet containing

3 large rocks of crack cocaine weighing approximately 10 grams.

                            III. DISCUSSION

A.   Request for Franks Hearing

     To warrant a Franks hearing, a defendant must make

“allegations of deliberate falsehood or of reckless disregard for

the truth, and those allegations must be accompanied by an offer

of proof.”    United States v. Rumney, 867 F.2d 714, 720 (1st Cir.



                                    4
       Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 5 of 13



1989) (quoting Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 171 (1978)).

Furthermore, the defendant must show that the misrepresentations

or omissions were material such that the if the affidavit were

corrected, it would no longer support a finding of probable cause

to issue the search warrant.       Id.

      1.   Misrepresentation of Criminal History

      Defendant argues that Pearson misrepresented the extent of

Mr. Santos’s criminal history.       Specifically, defendant contents

that Pearson represented to the court that Mr. Santos’s criminal

history included six drug related crimes, when he had only been

convicted of four such offenses, and that Pearson noted that the

criminal history was fifteen items long without mentioning that

only six of the items actually resulted in a conviction.            This,

defendant contends, “created the impression that Mr. Santos had

been found guilty of nine more crimes than he had actually been

convicted of.”    (Def. Mot. for Franks Hr’g and to Supp. Evidence

9.)

      Defendant’s argument is unpersuasive.        In the search warrant

affidavit, Pearson wrote:

      That Santos has a 15 item criminal history consisting
      of 4 counts of possession of a class D controlled
      substance. Two counts of possession [with intent to]
      distribute class D controlled substance. And one count
      of unlawful possession of a firearm. See Criminal
      history attached and incorporated herein.

(Search Warrant Aff. ¶ 11, Docket No. 28-2.)         There are in fact

fifteen items listed in Santos’s criminal history.          (See Board of


                                     5
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 6 of 13



Probation Criminal History, Docket No. 28-2 at 8-9.)          While the

term “items” is ambiguous, it does not suggest that they are all

convictions nor can defendant show that Pearson made the

statement with reckless disregard for the truth.         Pearson

actually understated Santos’s criminal history because the

criminal history shows that there were five, rather than four,

Class D Possession charges.     (See id.)    Furthermore, all evidence

confirms that the criminal history was attached to the affidavit,

and thus available to the magistrate for clarification of any

ambiguities.     (See Search Warrant Aff. ¶ 11; Pearson Aff. ¶ 6,

Docket No. 30.)

     Finally, regardless of whether Pearson’s statements were

misrepresentations, defendant cannot show that they were material

to the probable cause determination.       It is undisputed that

Santos was convicted of six crimes, four of which were drug

possession charges, two of those with the intent to distribute.

This provides sufficient support, along with the additional

evidence from the CI, the surveillance and the residents, to find

probable cause to search the apartment for evidence of illegal

drug activity.

     2.     The Apartment Omissions

      Defendant first asserts that Pearson’s affidavit omitted

any reference to the fact that 19 Harrison Avenue had two

apartment units and that the second floor unit had more than one

occupant.    Defendant contends that these omissions were material

                                    6
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 7 of 13



to the probable cause determination because they show that the

high volume of visitors to the building could be explained by the

presence of multiple occupants rather than drug activity.

     While there is little evidence to help determine whether

Pearson acted with reckless disregard for the truth, there is

ample evidence to show that the omissions were not material to

the probable cause determination.        First, heavy foot traffic, as

described by Pearson, is in itself suggestive of drug activity.

See United States v. Hernandez Leon, 379 F.3d 1024, 1027 (8th

Cir. 2004) (“observations of heavy foot and vehicle traffic”

supported a finding of probable cause based on a narcotics

officer’s experience); see also United States v. Moore, 235 F.3d

700, 703-04 (observing “significant foot traffic suggesting

ongoing drug sales” supported a finding that Terry stop was

reasonable).    Pearson also identified by name three drug addicts

whom he had seen visiting 19 Harrison Avenue.          (Search Warrant

Aff. ¶ 12.)    Neighbors had also called to complain about drug

activity at 19 Harrison Avenue.      (Id. ¶ 10.)       Neighbors

specifically described the person dealing drugs as “a black male

with bushy hair tied in the back.”        (Id.)   This was consistent

with the CI’s description of “T.”        Finally, the CI made a

controlled buy of crack cocaine from “T” in the second floor

apartment of 19 Harrison Avenue.        (Id. ¶ 7-8.)    There was more

than enough evidence to give probable cause that drug sales were

occurring on the second floor of 19 Harrison Avenue, regardless

                                    7
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 8 of 13



of whether it was a one or two unit dwelling.

     In addition, it makes no difference whether Santos occupied

the apartment alone or with a roommate.        “Search warrants are not

directed at persons; they authorize the search of ‘place[s]’ and

the seizure of ‘things,’ and as a constitutional matter they need

not even name the person from whom the things will be seized.”

Zurcher v. The Stanford Daily, 436 U.S. 547, 555 (1978) (internal

quotes omitted).   The search warrant affidavit provided probable

cause to believe that the second floor of 19 Harrison Avenue

contained evidence of drug activity, regardless of whether or not

anyone else shared the apartment with the defendant.          See United

States v. Owens, 167 F.3d 739, 745 (1st Cir. 1999) (affirming

denial of Franks hearing despite the omission of evidence that

defendant resided with another person because it is “immaterial

whether [defendant] was living there alone or with others”).

     Defendant also asserts that Pearson omitted the fact that

the front door to 19 Harrison Avenue was locked and required a

key or the assistance of a tenant for entry.        This, he contends,

was material because it makes it “extremely implausible that a

constant stream of ‘drug addicts’ could have been accessing the

building, at least without arousing the attention of Salamone,

who noticed no such unusual traffic.”       Defendant relies upon the

unsworn statements of Salamone, obtained during a phone call with

a private investigator, stating that “there was no noticeable

traffic into [Santos’s and Glass’s] apartment.”         (Docket No. 25-2

                                    8
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 9 of 13



at 20.)

     A defendant’s allegations for the purposes of a Franks

hearing should be supported by “affadavits or sworn or otherwise

reliable statements of witnesses.”       Franks, 438 U.S. at 171.

Here, the unsworn testimony by Salamone is called into question

by statements that Salamone reportedly made to an agent of the

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives.         The agent’s

report indicates that “Salamone said that his bedroom door was

right by the front door and advised that there was a lot of

activity in and out of that front door going upstairs.”

     Furthermore, including the information that the common front

door was locked would support other information provided by

Pearson’s affidavit and thus strengthen the probable cause

determination.   The existence of the locked door corroborates

Pearson’s report that he “observed Santos keeping watch out of

his 2nd floor window.”    Presumably, since the door was locked

Santos would have to know when visitors arrived so that he could

go downstairs to let them inside.       This is consistent with the

reports of high foot traffic into the building.

     3.   The Omission of Jason Glass

     Defendant’s final argument is that “Pearson may have omitted

the possible involvement of Jason Glass with the police and/or

the CI with reckless disregard for the truth.”         Defendant notes

that it is “curious” that Pearson neglected to ever mention Glass

despite doing surveillance of 19 Harrison Avenue and identifying

                                    9
      Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 10 of 13



several visitors to the dwelling.        Defendant also suggests that

the CI must have known that Glass lived in the apartment given

his meetings there with Santos, and further suggests a possible

involvement between Glass and the police or the CI.

      As indicated by the language used in defendant’s brief, the

argument is highly speculative.       First, to warrant a Franks

hearing the omission from a search warrant affidavit must be

“only that of the affiant, not of any nongovernmental informant.”

Franks, 438 U.S. at 171.     Thus, even if the CI knew Glass and

deliberately did not mention him, it is immaterial to this

analysis.     Second, the CI reported seeing no one else in the

apartment and Pearson stated under oath that he was not aware of

the existence of Glass until after the search warrant had been

executed.     (Pearson Aff. ¶ 3).   Finally, Pearson stated under

oath that he doesn’t know of any connection between Glass and the

CI.   (Id.)    Defendant thus fails to make a showing that the

omission of Glass was done with deliberateness or recklessness.

      Defendant has failed to make a substantial showing that

Pearson made any misrepresentations or omissions that were

intentional, reckless, or material.       The motion for the Franks

hearing is denied.

B.    Particularity of the Search Warrant

      Defendant moves to suppress all evidence seized pursuant to

the search warrant, contending that the warrant and Pearson’s

affidavit failed to describe the place to be searched with

                                    10
     Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 11 of 13



sufficient particularity.     Defendant specifically notes that the

warrant authorizes a search of the entire dwelling at 19 Harrison

Avenue, and that Pearson’s affidavit refers to the entire second

floor, thus including the bedroom of Glass.

     The Fourth Amendment particularity requirement “ensures that

the search will be carefully tailored to its justifications, and

will not take on the character of the wide-ranging exploratory

searches the Framers intended to prohibit.”        Maryland v.

Garrison, 480 U.S. 79, 84.     “[S]earch warrants and affidavits

should be considered in a common sense manner, and hypertechnical

readings should be avoided.”     United States v. Bonner, 808 F.2d

864, 868 (1st Cir. 1986).     “The test for determining the adequacy

of the description of the location to be searched is whether the

description is sufficient ‘to enable the executing officer to

locate and identify the premises with reasonable effort, and

whether there is any reasonable probability that another premise

might be mistakenly searched.’”      United States v. Pervaz, 118

F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 1997) (quoting United States v. Bonner, 808

F.2d 864, 866 (1st Cir. 1986)).

     Although the search warrant facially referred only to 19

Harrison Avenue, Pearson’s affidavit made several references to

the second floor of the dwelling as the site of the criminal

activity.   “An affidavit may be referred to for purposes of

providing particularity if the affidavit accompanies the warrant,

and the warrant uses suitable words of reference which

                                   11
        Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 12 of 13



incorporate the affidavit."        United States v. Roche, 614 F.2d 6,

8 (1st Cir. 1980) (quoting United States v. Klein, 565 F.2d 183,

186 n.3 (1st Cir. 1977)).        Here, the warrant and the affidavit

can be read together to reference the second floor of the

dwelling because Pearson’s affidavit was attached to the search

warrant and the warrant included sufficient language of

incorporation.

     Furthermore, the knowledge of executing officers can be

considered in determining the sufficiency of the description of

the premises to be searched.        United States v. Vega-Figueroa, 234

F.3d 744, 756 (1st Cir. 2000).        In Vega-Figueroa, the court found

that despite the fact that the search warrant mistakenly listed

the incorrect building, the warrant was valid because the officer

who made the reports upon which the warrant was based was also

the officer who executed the warrant and correctly directed his

team to the defendant’s apartment.         Id.   Here, Pearson made

personal observations of the dwelling, his affidavit was the

basis for the warrant, and he led the search warrant execution

team successfully to Santos’s apartment.          Thus, contrary to what

the defendant argued, there was no reasonable possibility that

anywhere other than the second floor apartment could have been

searched.

     Finally, the reference to the second floor apartment was

sufficient particularity, regardless of whether Santos shared the

unit.    See United States v. Gilman, 684 F.2d 616, 618 (9th Cir.

                                      12
     Case 1:05-cr-10358-PBS Document 32 Filed 01/17/07 Page 13 of 13



1982) (“The general rule voiding the warrant for an undisclosed

multiunit structure does not apply if the defendant was in

control of the whole premises or they were occupied in common, if

the entire premises were suspect, or if the multiunit character

of the premises was not known to the officers.”).         Here, the

apartment was a single unit for residential use.         Santos had

access to all areas of the apartment.       Pearson testified that he

had no knowledge of Glass or that another person resided on the

second floor.   (Pearson Aff. ¶ 3.)      There is also evidence that

Glass had moved out of the apartment at some point.         (See Glass

Grand Jury Test., December 14, 2005, 11-12, Docket No. 28-4;

Pearson Grand Jury Test., Aug. 30, 2005, 31, Docket No. 25-2.)

The search warrant was sufficiently particular to allow the

officers to identify the suspected location of drug activity, and

the officers did in fact properly identify that location.

                                 ORDER

     The defendant’s motion for a Franks hearing and to suppress

evidence is DENIED.



                                  S/PATTI B. SARIS
                                 United States District Judge




                                   13
