Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 1 of 16                                                   PageID #: 69



                                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                            DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                     )
                                                             )
v.                                                           )                    Criminal No. 06-13-P-H
                                                             )
JUSTIN WOODBURY,                                             )
                                                             )
                              Defendant                      )



                       RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


          Justin Woodbury, charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm (a Star Bonifacio

Echeverria Firestar model .40-caliber pistol bearing serial number 2037122) in violation of 18 U.S.C.

§§ 922(g)(1) and 924(a), seeks to suppress evidence obtained pursuant to what he asserts was the

unlawful entry of his apartment at #7 Leisure Lane, Windham, Maine on or about September 9, 2005.

See Motion To Suppress Evidence, etc. (“Motion”) (Docket No. 12) at 1-3; Indictment (Docket No.

1). For the reasons that follow, I recommend that the Motion be denied.

                                                   I. Factual Backdrop1

          On September 9, 2005 Ernest W. MacVane III, a Windham, Maine police officer cross-

designated and federally deputized as a task-force agent of the federal Drug Enforcement

Administration, applied for a warrant to search “#7 Leisure Lane[,] Windham, Maine[,] believed to be


1
  No evidentiary hearing was held with respect to the instant motion, which challenges the validity of a search warrant. See generally
Motion. While both parties recite certain facts extrinsic to the warrant, there is no material disagreement between their versions of
those facts, obviating the need for an evidentiary hearing. Compare Motion at 2-3 with Government’s Objection to Defendant’s
Motion To Suppress, etc. (“Objection”) (Docket No. 14) at 3-4; see, e.g., United States v. Villegas, 388 F.3d 317, 324 (7th Cir.
2004) (“Because the purpose of an evidentiary hearing is to resolve material factual disputes among the parties, a hearing is not
required in the absence of such disputes.”).


                                                                  1
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 2 of 16                       PageID #: 70



the bottom floor left apartment. Said structure is a white multi-unit dwelling with a covered front

porch, and a grey shingled roof. Said dwelling is further described as ‘Attachment A’ to this

affidavit.” Application and Affidavit for Search Warrant (“Application”), Exh. 1 to Motion, at 1-2 &

3 n.1. The Application listed the owner/occupant of the location to be searched as Justin Woodbury.

See id. at 1. In an incorporated affidavit, MacVane stated that on or about May 5, 2005 he spoke with

Sergeant R. Michael Denbow, who passed along information from a confidential source, SOI#1. See

id. at 3, ¶ 2. MacVane added that the identity of SOI#1 was known to Denbow, to whom SOI#1 had

previously provided truthful information, and that SOI#1 was cooperating out of concern for the

community. See id. at 3 n.2. MacVane did not know whether SOI#1 was facing any charges. See id.

MacVane averred that he learned from Denbow:

       A)      That on or about May 5th[,] 2005, a SOI#1 contacted (Sgt. Denbow) and
               reported that once a week[,] on . . . Friday evenings, Kenneth DURGIN AKA
               J.D. drives into Portland, ME, and purchases cocaine from an unknown source.
                The address of the source is unknown, however the SOS name is Mike LNU,
               he is married, and has a handicap[ped] daughter.

       B)      After DURGIN picks up the cocaine in Portland he travels to an apartment on
               Lamb Street in Windham, Maine where he delivers the cocaine to a Justin
               WOODBURY.

       C)      Woodbury then “cuts” (slang for increasing the amount of cocaine by adding
               other materials) the cocaine at his (WOODBURY’S) apartment and further
               distributes the cocaine throughout Gorham, Windham and surrounding areas.

       D)      The SOI#1 reported seeing DURGIN delivering a “brick size” block of
               cocaine to WOODBURY at the Lamb Street location on or about April 5th[,]
               2005.

       E)      05-08-2005 1740 hrs., CI contacted Sgt. Denbow via telephone to report
               having subsequent information regarding WOODBURY. CI reported to Sgt.
               Denbow [that] he/she spoke to Woodbury on or about May 7th[,] 2005, during
               which time WOODBURY to[ld] the CI that he (WOODBURY) recently
               purchased a .40 or .44 caliber pistol[.] WOODBURY further bragged to the



                                                 2
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 3 of 16                                                   PageID #: 71



                      SOI#1 that he (WOODBURY) was a convicted felon. 2

            F)        The SOI#1 added that two of WOODBURY’S drug customers were Kenneth
                      DURGIN’S stepfather and the stepfather’s roommate.

Id. at 3-4, ¶ 2. MacVane also stated that on September 9, 2005 he spoke with another officer, Robert

Hunt of the Windham Police Department. See id at 4, ¶ 3. Hunt relayed to MacVane that the previous

day, September 8, 2005, he had stopped a white Camaro for speeding after observing it rapidly

accelerating from Lamb Street in Windham onto Route 35. See id. at 4, ¶¶ 3(a)-(c). Hunt noticed that

the lone driver, SOI#2, appeared nervous and asked why. See id at 4, ¶ 3(c). SOI#2 shrugged and

said that he/she was just nervous. See id. Hunt asked SOI#2 who he/she knew on Lamb Street, and

SOI#2 said he/she had just come from Justin Woodbury’s apartment. See id. MacVane went on:

            Officer Hunt told me that he was familiar with WOODBURY from previous police
            related intelligence reports as being a distributor of cocaine. SOI#2, without
            prompting, advised Officer Hunt who further advised me, by stating words to the effect
            of, that he/she knew what he (Officer Hunt) was thinking and that he/she was not into
            that kind of thing. Officer Hunt told me that he (Officer Hunt) understood the
            operator’s comments to mean [that] he/she was a suspected cocaine trafficker.

Id. at 4-5, ¶ 3(d). Saying that he/she had nothing to hide, SOI#2 invited Hunt to search his/her car,

which Hunt did, finding nothing. See id. at 5, ¶¶ 3(d)-(e). When SOI#2 continued to appear nervous,

Hunt asked if he/she was worried about anything. See id. at 5, ¶ 3(e). “SOI #2 told Officer Hunt . . .

that the SOI#2 wanted to talk with someone about illegal activities that he/she knew about, but was

concerned about being seen on the side of the road talking with the police.” Id. Hunt inquired whether

SOI#2 wished to talk to him about Justin Woodbury; SOI#2 confirmed that he/she did, but did not want

his/her name used if his/her information led to police response against Woodbury because he/she




2
    It is apparent that MacVane’s references to “CI” in this paragraph were meant to be references to “SOI#1.”


                                                                 3
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 4 of 16                                            PageID #: 72



feared retribution from Woodbury’s drug-trafficking organization. See id.3 Hunt later met SOI#2 at a

variety store where SOI#2 told him:

         ?         that the (SOI#2) has been a frequent visitor to Justin WOODBURY’s
                   apartment; and

         ?         that on several occasions he/she had been present while WOODBURY
                   prepared cocaine for distribution, and that WOODBURY receives weekly
                   quantities of cocaine, and that the best time to “hit him” (WOODBURY) with
                   cocaine is on the weekends.

         ?         [t]hat WOODBURY had recently purchased a new Ford SUV for $9000.00
                   cash, which he/she believed was purchased with proceeds derived from drug
                   trafficking.

         ?         [t]hat Woodbury offered the (SOI#2) cocaine during his visit on September
                   8th[,] 2005, though he/she claimed not to have observe[d] it (cocaine).

         ?         . . . that Woodbury displayed, and further allowed SOI#2 . . . to handle[,] a .40
                   caliber handgun; and

         ?         that WOODBURY’S handgun is kept in a closet within WOODBURY’S
                   apartment.

         ?         [t]hat WOODBURY is a convicted felon and does not carry the gun away from
                   his apartment.

         ?         [t]hat WOODBURY primarily deals his cocaine to lower level customers
                   throughout Windham and Gorham, Maine, particularly the Little Falls Area of
                   Gorham.

         ?         [that] Woodbury transports his cocaine concealed in his pants, pinned near his
                   zipper to avoid detection; and

         ?         that Woodbury only deals in cocaine.


Id. at 5-6, ¶ 3(f). MacVane added that he (MacVane) was “aware, through prior law enforcement


3
  MacVane described SOI#2 as a minor and a resident of Windham, Maine. See Application at 4 n.3. Per MacVane, SOI#2 faced
no charges from the Windham Police Department and was cooperating out of fear of Woodbury’s drug-trafficking organization. See
id. MacVane knew SOI#2’s identity. See id.


                                                              4
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 5 of 16                       PageID #: 73



contacts, that WOODBURY and other member[]s of his drug trafficking organization have committed

acts of violence and have been in possession of firearms.” Id. at 6, ¶ 4. He concluded:

“Therefore, . . . I believe that there is probable cause that Justin WOODBURY/ DOB: 05-15-1981, is

committing the crime of trafficking cocaine. And that this crime is being committed at or on the

curtilage of, #7 Leisure Lane[,] Windham, Maine.” Id. at 6, ¶ 5.

        On September 9, 2005 Maine District Court Judge Andrew Horton signed a warrant

authorizing search of “#7 Leisure Lane[,] Windham, Maine[,] believed to be the bottom floor left

apartment. Said structure is a white multi-unit dwelling with a covered front porch, and a gray

shingled roof.” Search Warrant (“Warrant”), Exh. 2 to Motion, at 1; see also Motion at 2; Objection

at 3. The Warrant identified Justin Woodbury as the owner or occupant of the premises. See Warrant

at 2.

        On September 9, 2005 multiple officers, including MacVane, Windham police officers and

federal agents, attempted to effectuate the Warrant at #7 Leisure Lane, bottom-floor left apartment.

See Motion at 2; Objection at 3. When MacVane knocked on the door of the bottom-floor left

apartment, its occupant informed him that Woodbury did not live there and redirected the officers to

the top-floor apartment on the left. See id. The officers proceeded to that apartment, knocked loudly

on the door and requested that Woodbury open it. See id. They heard some noises emanating from

inside the apartment. See id. After a brief wait, they announced themselves as police with a search

warrant. See id. MacVane used a ram to forcibly open the door. See id. Once inside, officers

discovered and detained the defendant and searched the apartment, seizing a firearm, drug

paraphernalia and other items. See Motion at 2-3; Objection at 3-4; see also Exhs. 3-4 to Motion.

After being read the Miranda warnings, Woodbury was interrogated and made inculpatory statements.



                                                 5
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 6 of 16                                                     PageID #: 74



 See Motion at 3; Objection at 4; Exh. 1 to Objection. 4

                                                           II. Analysis

          Woodbury identifies three errors on the basis of which he seeks suppression of the firearm and

other items seized from his apartment and statements he made on September 9, 2005: that (i) the

Warrant did not permit search of his apartment but rather a different apartment, (ii) in any event, the

Warrant failed to provide probable cause as to the location at #7 Leisure Lane, and (iii) the Warrant

failed to establish probable cause as to the existence of criminal activity or contraband at #7 Leisure

Lane. See Motion at 4-5. The government defends the validity of the Warrant and the search

conducted pursuant thereto and, alternatively, invokes the so-called Leon good-faith exception. See

Objection at 5-13; see also United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 922-25 (1984). As to all points

raised, I conclude that the government has the better of the argument. Hence, I recommend that the

motion to suppress be denied.

                                             A. Particularity of Description

          The defendant’s first point implicates the command of the Fourth Amendment that “no warrants

shall issue, but upon probable cause, and particularly describing the place to be searched.” United

States v. Bonner, 808 F.2d 864, 866 (1st Cir. 1986) (citation and internal punctuation omitted). The

“manifest purpose” of this particularity requirement “is to prevent wide-ranging general searches by

the police.” Id. As the First Circuit has observed: “The test for determining the adequacy of the

description of the location to be searched is whether the description is sufficient to enable the

executing officer to locate and identify the premises with reasonable effort, and whether there is any

4
  Per Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), an accused must be advised prior to custodial interrogation “that he has the right to
remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and
that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at
(continued on next page)


                                                                   6
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 7 of 16                           PageID #: 75



reasonable probability that another premise might be mistakenly searched.” Id. (citations and internal

quotation marks omitted).

          The defendant contends that, in this case, (i) the Warrant unequivocally identified only one

apartment – the bottom-floor left apartment – as the premises to be searched, and (ii) officers did in

fact understand the Warrant as permitting the search of that apartment, which is precisely where they

headed on arrival at #7 Leisure Lane. See Motion at 5; Defendant’s Response to the Government’s

Objection to Defendant’s Motion To Suppress Evidence, etc. (“Reply”) (Docket No. 16) at 1-3.

Therefore, in the defendant’s view, the Warrant clearly did not authorize search of an apartment on the

top floor, left hand side, of #7 Leisure Lane. See id. The government rejoins that, while officers

incorrectly believed that the defendant’s apartment was located on the bottom floor, what they sought,

and what the Warrant authorized, was permission to search the apartment belonging to Justin

Woodbury at #7 Leisure Lane. See Objection at 5-7. I agree.

          “[S]earch warrants and affidavits should be considered in a common sense manner, and

hypertechnical readings should be avoided.” Bonner, 808 F.2d at 868; see also, e.g., Commonwealth

v. Cohen, 382 N.E.2d 1105, 1107 (Mass. App. Ct. 1978) (“[N]either warrants nor their supporting

affidavits require a conveyancer’s precise language, and the rigors of an average criminal

investigation are not to be intensified by a pecksniffian attention to noncrucial detail on review.”)

(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). In keeping with that spirit, the First Circuit has ruled

that a mistaken address, or omission altogether of an address, does not invalidate a search warrant in

circumstances in which, in the totality of the circumstances, there was no reasonable probability that

another premises might mistakenly be searched. See, e.g., United States v. Cunningham, 113 F.3d


478-79.


                                                    7
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 8 of 16                              PageID #: 76



289, 294 (1st Cir. 1997) (wiretapping warrant valid when, despite its seriously confusing language,

both judge and executing officer knew what had been proposed and authorized); Bonner, 808 F.2d at

866-67 (description of premises adequate despite inadvertent omission of address when “agents,

having previously conducted the surveillance, knew exactly which house they wanted to search,

described it accurately and in detail in their affidavit, and searched only that house without delay after

the warrant issued”).

        Inasmuch as appears, the First Circuit has not had occasion to consider whether a warrant

identifying the wrong unit in a multi-unit building is sufficiently definite when it correctly identifies the

name of the unit occupant. As the defendant points out, a search warrant for an apartment house, hotel

or other multiple-unit building usually is held invalid if it fails to describe the particular unit to be

searched with sufficient definiteness to preclude an indiscriminate search of one or more units. See

Reply at 4; see also, e.g., United States v. Higgins, 428 F.2d 232, 234-35 (7th Cir. 1970); United

States v. Rivera Rodriguez, 768 F. Supp. 16, 18 (D.P.R. 1991). On the other hand, as noted in Rivera

Rodriguez – one of the cases the defendant cites – accurate identification of the name of the unit

occupant typically has been held adequate to satisfy the Fourth Amendment’s particularity requirement.

See Rivera Rodriguez, 768 F. Supp. at 21 n.5 (“We note that a search warrant directed against a

multi-occupancy structure which fails to accurately describe the particular subunit to be searched will

not ordinarily be held invalid when it adequately specifies the name of the occupant of the subunit.”);

see also, e.g., United States v. Bedford, 519 F.2d 650, 655 (3d Cir. 1975) (warrant was sufficiently

definite when it specified address of multi-unit building and name of person whose apartment was to

be searched); United States v. Vaughan, 875 F. Supp. 36, 42-43 (D. Mass. 1995) (same).

        Here, there is a twist: the combination of a wrong apartment description (bottom left versus top

left) with an accurate listing of a unit occupant’s name. Does that invalidate the Warrant? I think not.

                                                     8
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 9 of 16                         PageID #: 77



In this case, affiant MacVane made clear that he sought to search the apartment of Justin Woodbury,

that Woodbury lived in a multiple-unit building at #7 Leisure Lane in Windham, and that MacVane

believed the precise location of Woodbury’s apartment was the bottom-floor, left hand side. See

Application at 1-2. In parallel fashion, the Warrant likewise made clear that police were authorized

to search the unit of Justin Woodbury at #7 Leisure Lane, believed to be the bottom-floor, left

apartment. See Warrant at 1-2. This description was sufficient – as it would have been had the

Warrant merely stated that it authorized the search of the apartment of Justin Woodbury at #7 Leisure

Lane – “to enable the executing officer to locate and identify the premises with reasonable effort[.]”

Bonner, 808 F.2d at 866 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted); see also, e.g., United States

v. Dollson, No. CRIM.A. 04-CR-402, 2004 WL 2577551, at *3 (E.D. Pa. Oct. 25, 2004) (“[C]ourts

have authorized warrants listing the name of an apartment’s occupant or describing its physical

characteristics, even if an address is incorrect or unavailable.”). That, indeed, was precisely what

executing officers did upon arriving at #7 Leisure Lane: locate the Woodbury apartment with a

modicum of effort. There was no reasonable probability that the wrong unit would have been

searched.

       The Warrant accordingly authorized the search that transpired of the defendant’s apartment,

describing it with sufficient particularity to pass constitutional muster despite MacVane’s mistake as

to the unit’s precise location within the multiple-unit #7 Leisure Lane.



                               B. Probable Cause: Nexus Element

       The defendant next challenges the probable-cause underpinnings for issuance of the Warrant.

See Motion at 5-9. As an initial matter, he asserts that the MacVane affidavit fails to demonstrate any

nexus between the #7 Leisure Lane address (which neither confidential source mentions) and the

                                                  9
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 10 of 16                             PageID #: 78



defendant or his alleged criminal activity. See id. at 5-6.

        “A warrant application must demonstrate probable cause to believe that (1) a crime has been

committed – the ‘commission’ element, and (2) enumerated evidence of the offense will be found at

the place to be searched – the so-called ‘nexus’ element.” United States v. Ribeiro, 397 F.3d 43, 48

(1st Cir. 2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Both the issuing magistrate and a

subsequent reviewing court look to “the totality of the circumstances indicated [within the four corners

of] a supporting affidavit” to assess the existence vel non of probable cause. United States v.

Schaefer, 87 F.3d 562, 565 (1st Cir. 1996). “Yet such review cannot start from scratch. A

magistrate’s determination of probable cause should be paid great deference by reviewing courts.” Id.

(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

        “In determining whether the nexus element is satisfied, a magistrate has to make a practical,

common-sense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before him,

there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place.”

Ribeiro, 397 F.3d at 48-49 (citation and internal punctuation omitted). “Put differently, the

application must give someone of reasonable caution reason to believe that evidence of a crime will

be found at the place to be searched.” Id. at 49 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

        As the defendant argues, see Motion at 5, the two confidential sources described in MacVane’s

affidavit discussed the defendant’s connection to Lamb Street in Windham but not to #7 Leisure Lane,

see Application at 3-6. Nonetheless, MacVane (i) asserted at the outset of his affidavit that he was

investigating a case involving illegal use and trafficking of cocaine by the defendant at #7 Leisure

Lane in Windham, see id at 3, ¶ 1, and (ii) relayed reports from SOI#1 and SOI#2 of criminal

activities allegedly occurring at the defendant’s apartment, see, e.g., id. at 3, ¶ (2)(C) (noting that, per

SOI#1, “Woodbury then ‘cuts’ . . . the cocaine at his (WOODBURY’S) apartment”), 4, ¶ (3)(c)

                                                    10
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 11 of 16                           PageID #: 79



(SOI#2 “had just come from Justin WOODBURY’S apartment” when stopped by Hunt) & 5, ¶ 3(f)

(SOI#2 had been “a frequent visitor to Justin WOODBURY’S apartment” and had been present on

several occasions while Woodbury prepared cocaine for distribution). The references contained in

the MacVane affidavit to a Lamb Street apartment are ambiguous; one could just as easily conclude

that it is a different apartment than the defendant’s as that it is one and the same. See generally id. In

short, the affidavit sufficed to permit a reviewing judge to believe that evidence of a commission of a

crime (cocaine trafficking) would be found at the defendant’s apartment, which MacVane had

determined was located at #7 Leisure Lane in Windham.

                      C. Probable Cause: Reliance on Confidential Sources

        The defendant next, and finally, attacks the probable-cause underpinning of the Warrant on the

bases that (i) the MacVane affidavit failed to establish the reliability of either confidential informant,

(ii) there was insufficient probable cause to establish that the defendant was a felon in possession of a

firearm, and (iii) the evidence provided by SOI#1 was stale. See Motion at 6-9.

        As the First Circuit has observed, an affiant need not necessarily assess (or otherwise vouch

for) the credibility of informants to demonstrate probable cause for issuance of a warrant. See, e.g.,

Schaefer, 87 F.3d at 566 (“[A]n informant’s tales need not invariably be buttressed by extensive

encomia to his veracity or detailed discussions of the source of his knowledge. While an informant’s

truthfulness and basis of knowledge are highly relevant in determining the value of his report, the

[Supreme] Court has cautioned that these elements should [not] be understood as entirely separate and

independent requirements to be rigidly exacted in every case.”) (citation and internal quotation marks

omitted); see also, e.g., United States v. Spinosa, 982 F.2d 620, 626 (1st Cir. 1992) (“The affidavit

must be viewed in its entirety, and must be given a common-sense and realistic, rather than a

hypertechnical interpretation.”) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).

                                                   11
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 12 of 16                         PageID #: 80



       Informants’ credibility can be established in multiple ways, including:

       1.      Consistency among independent reports. See, e.g., Schaefer, 87 F.3d at 566 (“Courts

often have held that consistency between the reports of two independent informants helps to validate

both accounts.”).

       2.      Declarations against penal interest. See, e.g., id. (“The fact that an informant’s

statements are against his or her penal interest adds credibility to the informant’s report.”).

       3.      Consistency with information provided by “ordinary citizens” (such as complaints by

neighbors that an individual was cultivating marijuana) – a type of report that enjoys “special stature

since information provided by ordinary citizens has particular value in the probable cause equation.”

Id.

       4.      Corroboration by external data. See, e.g., id. at 567 (“The record contains several

external data (i) confirming the identities and predilections of Crawford, Spellman, and other growers

in the group, (ii) pinning down Crawford’s and Spellman’s involvement with cannabis cultivation, and

(iii) demonstrating the group’s access to marijuana plants that were being grown indoors.”) (footnote

omitted).

       5.      Self-authentication “through the very specificity and detail with which [an affidavit]

relates the informant’s first-hand description of the place to be searched[.]” United States v. Zayas-

Diaz, 95 F.3d 105, 111 (1st Cir. 1996).

       In this case, the reliability of the reports of SOI#1 and SOI#2 was adequately established by:

       1.      MacVane’s representation that SOI#1 had previously provided truthful information to

Denbow and was cooperating out of concern for the community.

       2.      The manner in which Hunt obtained information from SOI#2, a minor who was not

facing any criminal charge, had essentially volunteered the information after having been stopped for a

                                                  12
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 13 of 16                        PageID #: 81



speeding violation, and expressed sufficient fear of the defendant’s drug-trafficking organization that

he/she did not want to be seen speaking to police.

       3.      Cross-corroboration between the reports of both confidential sources (both of whom

described the defendant as engaged in cocaine trafficking and having bragged about, or displayed, a

firearm he had recently purchased).

       4.      MacVane’s asserted awareness, from prior law-enforcement contacts, that the

defendant and other members of his drug-trafficking organization had committed acts of violence and

been in possession of firearms.

       5.      Hunt’s asserted familiarity with the defendant from previous police-related intelligence

reports as being a cocaine distributor.

       Nor was SOI#1’s evidence, which was approximately four months old at the time of the

Warrant application, too stale to be taken into consideration. “Staleness must be evaluated in light of

the particular facts of the case and the nature of the criminal activity and property sought.” United

States v. Greany, 929 F.2d 523, 525 (9th Cir. 1991). “When the evidence sought is of an ongoing

criminal business of a necessarily long-term nature, such as marijuana growing, rather than that of a

completed act, greater lapses of time are permitted if the evidence in the affidavit shows the probable

existence of the activity at an earlier time.” Id. By these lights, four-month-old evidence of cocaine

trafficking, freshened by day-old evidence suggestive of an ongoing operation, readily can be

discerned to have no staleness problem. See, e.g., United States v. Feliz, 182 F.3d 82, 87 (1st Cir.

1999) (three-month-old evidence of drug transactions not stale; “courts have upheld determinations of

probable cause in trafficking cases involving similar or even longer periods”); Greany, 929 F.2d at

525 (two-year-old evidence of existence of marijuana-growing venture not stale); United States v.

Reiner, 382 F. Supp.2d 195, 198-99 (D. Me. 2005) (given existence of advertisements

                                                  13
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 14 of 16                            PageID #: 82



contemporaneous with warrant application suggesting that health club was engaged in business of

prostitution, “slightly more distant but still recent historical data [suggesting the same] were also

relevant.”) (footnote omitted).

       Finally, even assuming arguendo that the MacVane affidavit failed to establish probable cause

to believe that the defendant was a felon in possession in a firearm, that is – as the government

suggests – beside the point. See Objection at 11. The affidavit established probable cause to believe

that the defendant had committed the crime of cocaine trafficking and that fruits of that crime would be

found in his apartment. The search via which the firearm was discovered therefore was lawful.

                                  D. Leon Good-Faith Exception

       Should the court agree that the Warrant sufficiently describes the defendant’s apartment as the

place to be searched and is supported by probable cause, that determination will be dispositive of the

motion to suppress. However, even assuming arguendo that the court finds the Warrant deficient, I

recommend denial of the motion to suppress based on the so-called Leon good-faith exception.

Pursuant to this doctrine, “[e]vidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment is admissible in

court if the government placed an objectively reasonable reliance on a neutral and detached magistrate

judge’s incorrect probable cause determination.” United States v. Crosby, 106 F. Supp.2d 53, 58 (D.

Me. 2000), aff’d, 24 Fed. Appx. 7 (1st Cir. 2001) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The

Leon exception is itself subject to exceptions:

       There are four exclusions to the Leon good-faith exception: (1) when the magistrate
       was misled by information in an affidavit that the affiant knew was false or would
       have known was false except for his reckless disregard for the truth; (2) where the
       issuing magistrate wholly abandoned his detached and neutral judicial role; (3) where
       the affidavit is so lacking in indicia of probable cause as to render official belief in its
       existence entirely unreasonable; and (4) where a warrant is so facially deficient – i.e.
       in failing to particularize the place to be searched or the things to be seized – that the
       executing officers cannot reasonably presume it to be valid.


                                                   14
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 15 of 16                                                       PageID #: 83




United States v. Owens, 167 F.3d 739, 745 (1st Cir. 1999) (citation and internal punctuation omitted).

 The defendant invokes the fourth exception, arguing:

          [T]he Agent knowingly acted outside the scope of the warrant by forcibly entering an
          apartment clearly not designated by the Search Warrant. There is absolutely no doubt
          that the agents knew that they were about to search an apartment that they were not
          authorized to search in accordance with the search warrant. This was obvious as they
          climbed the stairs to an alternative apartment in the building.

Reply at 7.5

          The defendant overstates his case. As noted above, the Warrant is most sensibly read as

authorizing a search of the defendant’s apartment located at #7 Leisure Lane. Even if, contrary to my

recommendation, the court were to find the Warrant’s description constitutionally inadequate, it was

not so facially deficient that executing officers could not reasonably have presumed it to be valid.



                                                         III. Conclusion

          For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that the defendant’s motion to suppress evidence be

DENIED.



                                                              NOTICE

        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days
after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral
argument before the district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the

5
  The defendant originally adverted to the first Leon exception, arguing that “the good[-]faith exception is not available when the affiant
intentionally omitted facts or was reckless in preparing the affidavit by not including information which was known or easily accessible
to him.” Motion at 9 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). However, he has proffered no evidence tending to show
intentional or reckless omission of facts.


                                                                   15
Case 2:06-cr-00013-DBH Document 18 Filed 05/24/06 Page 16 of 16                        PageID #: 84



objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review by
the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 24th day of May, 2006.

                                                      /s/ David M. Cohen
                                                      David M. Cohen
                                                      United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 16
