 Case 1:05-cr-00043-JAW Document 27 Filed 06/05/06 Page 1 of 4                     PageID #: 49



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                     )
                                              )
v.                                            ) Crim. No. 5-43-B-W
                                              )
HERBERT F. WARRENDER,                         )
                                              )
               Defendant                      )

                               RECOMMENDED DECISION
                           ON AMENDED MOTION TO SUPPRESS

       Defendant Herbert F. Warrender has moved to suppress all evidence and any statements

made by him during an incident that occurred at his home on December 2, 2003. Warrender

claims that the police made a "warrantless" entry into his home when they entered to arrest him

pursuant to an federal arrest warrant issued by the District of Connecticut for alleged supervised

release violations. I held a telephone conference with counsel on May 30, 2006. Both counsel

agreed that the defendant's memorandum in support of the motion to suppress contained all of

the facts necessary for resolution of this motion. The Government and defendant's counsel

agreed that for the limited purpose of resolving this motion I could adopt those facts as

established and that no hearing was necessary. I now recommend the court deny the amended

motion to suppress.

                                   Proposed Findings of Fact

       This investigation began on November 26, 2003, when two U.S. Marshals apparently

received a federal arrest warrant for Mr. Warrender from the District of Connecticut for alleged

supervised release violations. Between November 26 and December 1, the marshals confirmed
 Case 1:05-cr-00043-JAW Document 27 Filed 06/05/06 Page 2 of 4                     PageID #: 50



Mr. Warrender’s residence in a trailer park in Hampden, Maine. On December 1, 2003, the

marshals began surveillance of the residence. On December 2, 2003, the marshals drove past and

further confirmed Mr. Warrender’s presence at the residence by identifying his vehicle in the

dooryard.

       Instead of seeking a search warrant, the two marshals requested and received assistance

from at least one officer of the Hampden Police Department. All three officers then returned to

Mr. Warrender’s residence and surrounded the trailer. When two of the officers approached from

the front of the residence, they witnessed Mr. Warrender observe them through the kitchen

window, at which point Mr. Warrender then ran for the back of the trailer. The officers entered

the residence and arrested Mr. Warrender.

       The marshals knew of Mr. Warrender’s residence for six days prior to the search. The

officer’s knew that the success of a simple knock and talk would be unlikely, as evidenced by the

fact that backup was requested by the marshals. The officers knew that Mr. Warrender might flee

because they stationed an officer at the back of the residence. The officers had reason to believe

that Mr. Warrender had established a permanent residence. They had observed his vehicle

in the dooryard.

       As a result of and immediately following that illegal search, police questioned Michelle

Wilson, Mr. Warrender’s girlfriend, who also resided at the residence. Ms. Wilson told a

marshal there was a gun concealed at the residence. When the marshal asked if she would

retrieve the firearm and allow him to accompany her, Ms. Wilson consented. At the scene,

Mr. Warrender was read Miranda and confessed that he had possessed the firearm.

                                            Discussion

       The law enforcement officers who entered the defendant’s residence had a valid warrant




                                                 2
    Case 1:05-cr-00043-JAW Document 27 Filed 06/05/06 Page 3 of 4                               PageID #: 51



for the defendant’s arrest. That fact is not disputed. The arrest warrant itself is enough to

authorize entry into the defendant’s residence to effectuate his arrest. See Payton v. New York,

445 U.S. 573, 602-03 (1980) ("If there is sufficient evidence of a citizen's participation in a

felony to persuade a judicial officer that his arrest is justified, it is constitutionally reasonable to

require him to open his doors to the officers of the law. Thus, for Fourth Amendment purposes,

an arrest warrant founded on probable cause implicitly carries with it the limited authority to

enter a dwelling in which the suspect lives when there is reason to believe the suspect is

within."); United States v. Weems, 322 F.3d 18, 22 (1st Cir. 2003)("If Weems effectively lived

at 11 Padelford, the arrest warrant itself would be enough to authorize entry into his residence to

effectuate his arrest.").

        There is no dispute that there was a valid arrest warrant for Warrender and Warrender, by

his own statement of fact, concedes that the officers believed he had established his permanent

residence at the Hampden trailer. There is no basis set forth in this motion to suppress the

firearm or statements.

                                                  Conclusion

        Based upon the foregoing, I recommend the court deny the pending amended motion to

suppress. 1

                                                    NOTICE

                 A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
        judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
        28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
        together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
        district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
        thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
        district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.


1
        Defendant's counsel has filed a motion seeking leave to file a new motion, alleging new and additional
grounds, without elaboration. If, and when a new motion is filed, that motion can be addressed on its merits.


                                                        3
 Case 1:05-cr-00043-JAW Document 27 Filed 06/05/06 Page 4 of 4                       PageID #: 52



              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.



                                              /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                              U.S. Magistrate Judge
June 5, 2006




                                                 4
