Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 1 of 11                 PageID #: 22



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                   )
                                           )
        v.                                 )          CASE NO. 06-24-M
                                           )
SHAUN G. LEMOINE                           )


                                   DENTENTION ORDER

        Concluding that the Government sustained its burden to demonstrate by clear and

convincing evidence that no condition or combination of conditions will reasonably assure the

safety of the community, this Court grants the Government’s motion for Shaun Lemoine’s pre-

trial detention.

I. Background

        On June 6, 2006, a Hancock County Grand Jury indicted Shaun G. Lemoine for burglary,

a Class B felony, Govt. Ex. 11, and on August 16, 2006, the United States filed a criminal

complaint against Mr. Lemoine, alleging two counts of the knowing receipt of firearms while

under felony indictment and two counts of false statements in acquisition of firearms. Comp.

(Docket # 1). Following his arrest on August 18, 2006, Mr. Lemoine made his initial appearance

on the same day and pursuant to a Government motion for temporary detention, Mr. Lemoine

was ordered temporarily detained under 18 U.S.C. § 3142(f)(2). A detention hearing was held

pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3142(f) on August 23, 2006.

II. Legal Standards

        Section 3142 sets forth the standards to determine whether a person charged with a

federal crime may be detained pending trial. United States v. Dillard, 214 F.3d 88, 90-91 (2d

Cir. 2000).    Under the Bail Reform Act, paragraph 3142(a)(4) specifies that, for defendants
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 2 of 11                                    PageID #: 23



arrested on criminal charges, pretrial detention is available only pursuant to subsection (e).

Subsection (e) states that a person may be detained if the judicial officer finds after a hearing

under subsection (f), that no condition or combination of conditions will reasonably assure the

“safety of . . . the community.” 1 18 U.S.C. § 3142(e). Subsection (f) allows a detention hearing

before a judicial officer if the defendant has been charged with an offense that “involves the use

or possession of a firearm . . . .” 2 Id. § 3142(f). The Government bears the burden of supporting

its motion “by clear and convincing evidence,” id. § 3142(f)(2), and the statute sets forth a series

of factors the court must consider in making its determination, including whether the offense

involves a firearm. Id. § 3142(g).

III. Detention Hearing

        A. A Division of Opinion

        Mr. Lemoine, 26 years old, is a lifelong resident of Swans Island, a beautiful and self-

contained coastal island near Mount Desert Island.                       Swans Island, which consists of

approximately twenty square miles, is accessible only by boat; it has about 350 full-time

residents and swells to about 1,000 residents in the summer. News of the detention hearing

apparently spread throughout the Island and a small crowd of residents appeared at the hearing.

Both the Government and the Defendant called a number of witnesses.


1
   The statute also provides that detention may be ordered if no condition or combination of conditions will
reasonably assure the defendant’s appearance as required; however, the Government did not claim this provision
applied to Mr. Lemoine. 18 U.S.C. § 3142(e).
2
  Effective July 27, 2006, Congress amended 18 U.S.C. § 3142 to allow pretrial detention for offenses involving
firearms and to require consideration of this offense as a factor in determining whether to grant pretrial detention.
Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, Pub. L. No. 109-248, 120 Stat. 617, at § 216 (codified at 18 U.S.C. §
3142(f)(E), (g)) (effective July 27, 2006). This amendment statutorily resolves whether the Government may move
for pretrial detention for an offense involving possession of a firearm. Previously, the statutory standard turned on
whether a charge of illegal possession of a firearm was a crime of violence within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. §
3142(f)(1)(A), an issue on which courts were divided. Compare United States v. Dillard, 214 F.3d 88 (2d Cir.
2000); United States v. Escobar Gonzalez, No. 05-063, 2005 WL 459643 (D.P.R. Feb. 25, 2005); United States v.
Colon Osorio, 188 F. Supp. 2d 153 (D.P.R. 2002); with United States v. Singleton, 182 F.3d 7 (D.C. Cir. 1999);
United States v. Say, 233 F. Supp. 2d 221 (D. Mass. 2002); United States v. Powell, 813 F. Supp. 903 (D. Mass
1992).


                                                         2
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 3 of 11                                    PageID #: 24



        There is a distinct division of opinion about Mr. Lemoine’s character and whether he

poses a threat to others. 3 Some witnesses, including Gilbert Lemoine, the Defendant’s father,

Robert Harris, a local volunteer librarian, Gwen May, the Town Clerk and Treasurer, and others

describe Mr. Lemoine as essentially kindhearted and non-violent. While acknowledging that Mr.

Lemoine has a reputation in some circles as a “hell raiser,” that he has had “a dark cloud hanging

over him,” and that he has made some “bad choices,” these witnesses said that there are those

who “like to believe the worst” about anyone, especially when that person is Mr. Lemoine. In

the words of Robert Harris, some have “demonized” Mr. Lemoine and even joked that “if it is a

bad day, it must be Shaun Lemoine’s fault.” Mr. Harris and Ms. May explained that as the

Island has no newspaper, much news is by word of mouth; in other words, it is gossip, and as

gossip, it tends to exaggeration.

        Other witnesses, however, believe his reputation for violence and mischief is well

deserved. Two of the three-member Board of Selectmen, Dexter Lee and Carroll Staples, voiced

concerns on behalf of as many as fifteen to twenty Swans Island residents that if Mr. Lemoine

were released, they would be afraid of retribution. Through federal and local law enforcement

officers, including David Lemoine, the Defendant’s second cousin, the Government introduced

evidence of his extensive and recent criminal history, including acts of retaliation.                           The

Government also produced evidence of his possession of an array of firearms, four of which he

had purchased since the June 6, 2006 state indictment and since his June 23, 2006 release on bail

with conditions against any firearms possession.



3
  Some testimony addressed what appeared to be a longstanding and simmering suspicion among some Swans Island
lobstermen about the Defendant. Lobstermen tend to be territorial and incursions into what is known to be their
space are not taken kindly. These frictions are occasionally exacerbated when gear is lost or trap lines go missing,
especially after a deep fog. It is clear that some lobstermen retain an abiding conviction that Shaun Lemoine has had
a hand in their missing equipment. The evidence of his direct involvement, however, is not sufficiently convincing
to add to the list of accusations against Mr. Lemoine for purposes of his detention.


                                                         3
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 4 of 11                                 PageID #: 25



        B. The Statutory Criteria

        To resolve the community division of opinion, this Court has applied the statutory criteria

in 18 U.S.C. § 3142(g):

        (1) The nature and circumstances of the offense, including whether the offense
            involved firearms - 18 U.S.C. § 3142(g)(1)

        The criminal complaint charges Mr. Lemoine with four firearms offenses. As directed by

Congress, this is a factor against release. The circumstances of the offense are also troubling.

Mr. Lemoine was indicted on June 6, 2006. While still under indictment, on August 2, 2006, he

is alleged to have purchased two firearms from a firearms dealer in Southwest Harbor, a Smith &

Wesson 9 mm. cal. pistol and a Remington Model 742 .30-06 cal. rifle and, on August 9, 2006,

he is alleged to have purchased two additional firearms from the same dealer, two Jimenez Arms

Model JA9, 9 mm. cal. pistols. Although there is some evidence that Mr. Lemoine is a gun

collector, there was no evidence these pistols were collectors’ items. Nor is there any evidence

that these weapons are suitable for hunting or target practice. In particular, the JA9s are small,

easily concealed, and serious.4 The type of firearms is a factor against release.

        In addition, federal ATF Agent McSweyn testified about a search of Mr. Lemoine’s

residence and truck. His residence contained a bow and arrows, knives, a machete, ammunition,

and a .45 caliber pistol.5 More significant was the search of his motor vehicle. Parked alongside

the Lemoine pier was Mr. Lemoine’s unlocked Dodge pick-up truck. When Agent McSweyn

looked inside, he saw a pistol in plain view on the front seat. Pursuant to the search warrant, the

Agent searched the Lemoine pick-up and found: a JA9 pistol in the center console with a loaded


4
  Mr. Lemoine presented evidence that he has had a concealed weapons permit. But, the Government presented
further evidence that Chief of Police Jerry Michaud revoked his permit by certified mail on June 28, 2006. Govt.
Ex. 9.
5
  The search also revealed a Ruger .22 pistol; Cassandra Lemoine, Mr. Lemoine’s wife, testified she purchased the
.22 and the weapon was hers.


                                                       4
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 5 of 11                       PageID #: 26



magazine, but no rounds in the chamber; a Ruger Model P 95 under the front seat, loaded with a

round in the chamber; another JA9 pistol unloaded in the passenger door compartment; and, a

Webber .44 magnum rifle in the rear passenger seat. The presence in his pick-up of a small

arsenal of weapons, two of which were loaded, one with a round in the chamber is another factor

against release.

       (2) The weight of the evidence against the Defendant - 18 U.S.C. § 1342(g)(2)

       Agent McSweyn attached an affidavit to the criminal complaint. The affidavit revealed

that Agent McSweyn’s investigation was precipitated by information from Swans Island Police

Chief Michaud to the effect that Mr. Lemoine, though under state indictment, had purchased a

firearm from a federally-licensed firearms dealer in Southwest Harbor. The affidavit goes on to

confirm discussions with the firearms dealer that Mr. Lemoine had purchased firearms on two

occasions in August 2006 and had answered, “No,” to the question on ATF Form 4473 as to

whether he was under indictment. Agent McSweyn’s further investigation revealed that Mr.

Lemoine had traded a Smith & Wesson pistol for archery equipment on August 3, 2006 and as

noted, Agent McSweyn’s testimony confirmed the presence of a number of firearms in Mr.

Lemoine’s pick-up.

       During the hearing, Mr. Lemoine introduced evidence that he is not a proficient reader

and the town volunteer librarian testified that he tended to read “for gist.” Mr. Lemoine argued

that the evidence would establish that he had not read Form 4473 and instead relied on his prior

knowledge of the form from previous purchases. Be this as it may, there was no real response to

the allegations in the Complaint that Mr. Lemoine actually possessed one or more firearms. The

weight of the evidence, particularly on the possession charges, is a factor against release.

       (3) The history and characteristics of the Defendant - 18 U.S.C. § 3142(g)(3)(A)




                                                 5
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 6 of 11                    PageID #: 27



       The statute directs the court to consider a number of factors relating to the Defendant’s

history and characteristics, ranging from his criminal record to his family ties. Mr. Lemoine’s

criminal history included a conviction for criminal mischief on December 21, 2004. Gov’t Ex. 1.

This incident was disturbing, because it reflects a retaliatory streak in Mr. Lemoine. The police

report revealed that Mr. Lemoine had slashed all four tires on an automobile owned by a

Nicholas Meirer. When questioned, Mr. Lemoine had admitted to the incident, which was

caught on videotape at the town pier parking lot, but explained he had slashed Mr. Meirer’s tires

because he thought Mr. Meirer had tried to run him off the road the day before.

       On January 26, 2006, Mr. Lemoine pleaded guilty to another charge of criminal mischief.

Govt. Ex. 2.     Sergeant David Lemoine, the Defendant’s second cousin, testified that the

Defendant had slashed the tires of yet another individual. This time the victim was an elderly

man with some medical problems. This man had gone to Mr. Lemoine’s wife for a haircut. Mr.

Lemoine had taken umbrage, not wanting this gentleman to be around his wife and child and, in

retaliation, he slashed the man’s tires.

       On the same day he pleaded guilty to this second charge of criminal mischief, Mr.

Lemoine also pleaded guilty to theft.      Govt. Ex. 3. Sergeant Lemoine explained that Mr.

Lemoine and some of his friends were watching television and began to experience problems

with reception. They solved the problem by proceeding over to a neighbor’s house, climbing on

his roof, removing his antenna, and placing it on their roof.

       The state charge currently pending against Mr. Lemoine is that on March 30, 2005 he

burglarized a residence owned by Joshua Amburg. Govt. Ex. 11. The allegation is that Mr.

Lemoine together with some friends entered Mr. Amburg’s residence, removed his wood stove,

and took it to a friend’s home. This is not the last allegation of a run with Mr. Amburg. On




                                                 6
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 7 of 11                       PageID #: 28



November 8, 2005, Mr. Lemoine was charged with theft by receiving stolen property. Sergeant

Lemoine testified that someone had removed the tires from Mr. Amburg’s vehicle, transported

the tires off Swans Island, and installed them on another person’s vehicle on Mount Desert

Island. An eyewitness was prepared to testify that he saw the tires being ferried to Mount Desert

Island on Mr. Lemoine’s boat. This charge was later dismissed, when it was determined that the

evidence of Mr. Lemoine’s direct involvement was insufficient. Sergeant Lemoine also testified

that the person, who had cooperated with the police and provided the evidence that it was Mr.

Lemoine’s boat that had transported the tires, later found his boat motor disabled while on the

ocean, when numerous rubber lobster bands mysteriously entered his gas line.

           Finally, police reports reflect that Mr. Lemoine may have been involved in the theft of a

washing machine from the Borei cottage in the spring of 2005. The person who confirmed Mr.

Lemoine’s involvement was Christopher Lemoine, one of his friends.                When the police

interviewed Christopher Lemoine in the Hancock County Jail in the spring of 2006, they said

that Mr. Lemoine admitted that the Defendant had revealed his involvement in the washing

machine burglary. Govt. Ex. 4. However, at the same time, Christopher Lemoine expressed fear

of the Defendant. Id. This fear may have been justified. A police report reflects that on

December 28, 2005, Christopher Lemoine’s father, Gerald Lemoine, had called the Swans Island

police, complained that the Defendant had fired several shots from a motor vehicle in the

direction of the Lemoine residence, and alleged that Mr. Lemoine fired the shots to warn his son

against testifying against him. 6 Govt. Ex. 5. In conclusion, Mr. Lemoine’s criminal history is

another factor against release. His criminal history is recent, evidences a cavalier attitude toward

compliance with basic rules of society, and demonstrates a tendency to exact retribution against

those he perceives have wronged him.
6
    Gerald Lemoine later declined to press any charges.


                                                          7
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 8 of 11                       PageID #: 29



       There are positive aspects to Mr. Lemoine’s presentation. He is a hard worker, lobster

fishing nearly 475 traps, and as a result, when working, he earns a significant income. He is

married and has a young child. He is deeply interwoven in the Swans Island community, where

he has strong ties of family and friendship. Both his father and his father-in-law testified on his

behalf and offered to monitor his activities, if released. It is also true that the sense of fear Mr.

Lemoine generates in some people is not universally shared and he is perceived by many as a

genuinely nice and contributing member of the Island community.

       (4) Whether, at the time of the current offense or arrest, the Defendant was on
           probation, parole, or other release pending trial – 18 U.S.C. § 3142(g)(3)(B)

       One further statutory factor is whether the Defendant was on probation, parole, or other

release pending trial when he was arrested on the pending federal charge.              18 U.S.C. §

3142(g)(3)(B). Here, on June 23, 2006, Mr. Lemoine had been bailed on the state charges and as

a condition of bail, he was ordered not to “possess any dangerous weapons including but not

limited to firearms.” Govt. Ex. 12. Based on the contents of the Agent’s affidavit and the results

of the search of his residence and his motor vehicle, there is convincing evidence that he violated

those bail conditions by possessing one or more firearms and other dangerous weapons. His

apparent violation of the bail conditions is another factor against his release, since it does not

bode well for his compliance with bail conditions, if he were released on the federal charges.

           (5) The nature and seriousness of the danger to any person or the community –
               18 U.S.C. § 3142(g)(4)

       Even though there is ample testimony that some Swans Island residents are afraid of Mr.

Lemoine and are concerned about his release, the relationship between this case and their fear is

less than clear. The moving force of the ATF investigation is the Chief of Police, Jerry Michaud,

who, as Agent McSweyn’s affidavit states, contacted Agent McSweyn about the potential




                                                 8
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 9 of 11                      PageID #: 30



firearms violation. There is no evidence where Chief Michaud obtained his information and

whether the Defendant would likely retaliate against any specific individual as a result of the

initiation of federal charges. There is some implication that witnesses critical to the pending

state burglary charge might be at risk, especially since Mr. Amburg apparently lost his tires after

the wood stove burglary and since Christopher Lemoine expressed his concern. Nevertheless,

neither Christopher Lemoine nor Joshua Amburg testified at the detention hearing.

       The danger to the community, however, is best summed up by Mr. Lemoine himself. On

August 6, 2006, Sergeant David Lemoine spoke to the Defendant while investigating some

obscene and vaguely threatening language posted prominently on a storage tank located on the

Defendant’s pick-up truck. When he asked the Defendant about the language on the tank, Mr.

Lemoine responded that he intended to live the rest of his life fishing on Swans Island and if

anyone messed with him, they “would end up with a bullet or an arrow in them.” Govt. Ex. 10.

Given Mr. Lemoine’s then possession of both firearms and an archery set, this Court takes him at

his word and concludes he represents a threat of bodily harm to those he perceives as interfering

with him.

       a. No Condition or Combination of Conditions

       Mr. Lemoine presented an alternative to incarceration. Scott Alley, his father-in-law,

who lives in Southwest Harbor, offered to allow the Defendant to live with him and to assure that

he not return to Swans Island. Both his father and father-in-law testified that they would actively

monitor his activities and make certain he did not set foot on Swans Island. Mr. Lemoine further

represented that he was agreeable to electronic monitoring and to periodic telephone reporting

requirements. He also noted that as a lobster fisherman with a large number of traps, he would




                                                9
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 10 of 11                    PageID #: 31



be unable to tend his traps during any period of incarceration and his absence would have an

adverse impact on his financial well-being and on his family.

       This Court appreciates the willingness of the Defendant’s older relations to oversee his

activities and to make certain that he complies with conditions of release. However, one purpose

of his release would be to allow the Defendant to continue to fish for lobster, an activity that

would bring him close to Swans Island, close to some who have expressed concern about his

release, and close to the temptation for mischief. Further, Mr. Lemoine, the father, and Mr. Scott

Alley, his father-in-law, have their own jobs. Mr. Lemoine is himself a lobster fisherma n and

Mr. Alley is the road foreman for the Town of Southwest Harbor. It is unrealistic to expect these

gentlemen to assure the Defendant’s compliance with this Court’s order, especially where the

Defendant himself has manifestly failed to comply with a similar court order in the past.

       IV. Conclusion

       This Court concludes that the Government has met its high burden in this case and has

demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that no condition or combination of conditions

will reasonably assure the safety of other persons and the community.          The Defendant is

ORDERED detained pending further order of this Court.

       The Defendant is committed to the custody of the Attorney General or his designated

representative for confinement in a corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody pending appeal. The Defendant

shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity for private consultation with defense counsel. On

order of a court of the United States or on request of an attorney for the Government, the person

in charge of the corrections facility shall deliver the Defendant to the United States Marshal for

the purpose of an appearance in connection with a court proceeding.




                                               10
Case 1:06-cr-00059-JAW Document 14 Filed 08/25/06 Page 11 of 11    PageID #: 32



   SO ORDERED.



                                              John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                              JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


   Dated this 25th day of August, 2006




                                         11
