Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 1 of 33                         PageID #: 54



                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                   DISTRICT OF MAINE



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                       )
                                               )
v.                                             )               Criminal Nos. 06-19-P-S
                                               )                            06-26-P-S
                                               )
RICHARD DIMOTT,                                )
                                               )
                       Defendant               )



                 RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTIONS TO SUPPRESS


       Richard Dimott, charged with disobeying a lawful command of a court of the United States (an

order of conditions of release) by absconding from home confinement, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §

401(3), see Indictment (Docket No. 1), United States v. Dimott, Criminal No. 06-19-P-S (D. Me.)

(“Dimott I”), and being a felon in possession of seventeen firearms, in violation of 18 U.S.C.

§§ 922(g)(1) and 924(e), see Indictment (Docket No. 1), United States v. Dimott, Criminal No. 06-26-

P-S (D. Me.) (“Dimott II”), has filed an identical motion in both cases to suppress evidence seized

and statements made on April 5, 2005, see Motion To Suppress, etc. (“Dimott I Motion”) (Docket No.

15), Dimott I; Motion To Suppress, etc. (“Dimott II Motion”) (Docket No. 16), Dimott II. An

evidentiary hearing was held before me on December 12, 2006 at which the defendant appeared with

counsel. After both sides rested, counsel for the defendant affirmed that he continued to rely on all

bases for suppression identified in his papers but noted that he wished to assert one additional basis –

namely that, in executing a warrant to search a vehicle and a storage unit, the government assertedly

violated the requirements of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 41(f)(1) and (2). Counsel for the

                                                   1
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 2 of 33                                               PageID #: 55



government voiced no objection to the raising of the latter claim for the first time at hearing.

Accordingly, I have considered it. 1 Based on the evidence adduced at the hearing, I recommend that

the following findings of fact be adopted and that both motions to suppress be denied.

                                             I. Proposed Findings of Fact

          In late winter and early spring 2005 the York County Sheriff’s Office (“YCSO”) fielded three

calls from Rick Brewer of 324 Sokokis Trail in Limerick, Maine reporting break-ins and other

suspicious activity at the home Brewer shared with his wife, Diane Dunning. On February 28, 2005

Brewer phoned to report that their home had been broken into while they were out, but that nothing

was taken. Brewer told the YCSO that he was able to determine from Caller ID that someone with a

“blocked call number” had phoned the home while he and his wife were out; however, his phone was

not then set up to trace calls. He informed the YCSO that his home contained thirty-five to forty

firearms. He also voiced a belief that he was being watched.

         On March 26, 2005 Brewer again phoned the YCSO, reporting that someone with a blocked

call number had placed a call to his residence while he and his wife were out. However, he informed

the YCSO, this time he had made arrangements to be able to trace calls by dialing *57. In this instance

he had dialed *57, and his phone company had informed him that he had successfully traced the call.

Finally, on the morning of April 5, 2005, Brewer called the YCSO to report that he and his wife had

returned from a shopping trip to find that their home again had been broken into and that, this time, a

number of items had been stolen, including twenty-one firearms and an antique Rolls-brand razor.

Brewer further reported that as he and his wife drove home that morning he had noticed two

suspicious vehicles: a small silver or gray pickup truck with a blue tarp, which they had passed on the

1
 The defendant’s counsel also requested permission to file a post-hearing memorandum addressing the evidence adduced at hearing. I
(continued on next page)


                                                                2
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 3 of 33                                                  PageID #: 56



road on the way home, and a red Ford Taurus with New Hampshire license plates, which had been

parked alongside Route 5. Finally, Brewer told the YCSO that Caller ID again had revealed that

someone with a blocked call number had phoned while he and his wife were out that morning. He had

dialed *57 and had been informed that he had successfully traced the call.

          A YCSO log reveals that, at approximately 12:05 p.m., the YCSO released a “BOLO,” or “be

on the lookout” alert, for a faded gray Chevrolet S-10 pickup truck with a blue stripe and black tarp

over its bed and with three occupants, one described as having dark hair with a beard and mustache,

last seen headed south on Route 5 in Waterboro. See Defendant’s Exh. 1 at 3.

          YCSO Detective Steven Thistlewood was assigned as lead investigator in the Brewer burglary

case. He and several YCSO colleagues responded to the Brewer-Dunning home. They were joined

about an hour or two later by another colleague, YCSO Sergeant Michael Hayes, whom Thistlewood

briefed on what had transpired to date. Stephen Hickey, a special agent with the federal Bureau of

Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (“ATF”), also became involved when he happened that

morning to stop by the YCSO in connection with an unrelated case, overheard discussion of the

Brewer-Dunning burglary and, in part because of the sheer number of firearms involved, offered to

lend assistance.

          Upon Hayes’ arrival at the Brewer-Dunning residence, Thistlewood was in the process of

subpoenaeing records from Verizon disclosing the identity of the subscriber or subscribers from

whose phone blocked-number calls had been placed to the Brewer-Dunning home. Late that afternoon,

Hayes and Thistlewood learned from Verizon that the calls had been placed from an AT&T cell phone

belonging to Steven Riquinha of 16 Windsor Drive, Westbrook, Maine. Neither Hayes nor

____________________________
denied that request, expressing confidence that the court could resolve evidentiary conflicts without need of post-hearing briefing.


                                                                 3
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 4 of 33                                             PageID #: 57



Thistlewood had heard of Riquinha, and neither was familiar with the Windsor Drive address. They

called John Desjardins, a Westbrook Police Department (“WPD”) detective, who agreed to meet with

them and serve as their Westbrook “liaison” in investigating the Riquinha lead. Shortly thereafter

Thistlewood, Hayes and Hickey set off, in a caravan of three separate vehicles, to meet with

Desjardins at the WPD. After an approximately fifteen-minute conversation, during which the officers

briefed Desjardins on details of the case, the four officers regrouped into two unmarked vehicles

(Desjardins and Thistlewood in Desjardins’ car, and Hayes and Hickey in Hayes’ car), and drove to

Windsor Drive, part of a complex known as The Hamlet Coach Trailer Park (“The Hamlet”). See

Gov’t Exh. 1. The WPD frequently had been called to The Hamlet, and Desjardins was familiar with

Riquinha from past law-enforcement work. Desjardins felt he had developed a rapport with Riquinha

and might be able to elicit an honest answer why calls were placed to the Brewer-Dunning residence.

         At approximately 6 p.m., the four officers drove past 16 Windsor Drive, the trailer belonging

to Riquinha. They saw no vehicles in the driveway. They continued on until Windsor Drive dead-

ended into Peckham Street, another internal trailer-park road, where they stopped and briefly

strategized what to do next. The plan was for Desjardins and others to begin to interview some of

Riquinha’s neighbors. Hayes, accompanied by Hickey, stationed his car on Peckham Street, while

Desjardins, accompanied by Thistlewood, parked in a spot diagonally across from the Riquinha

trailer.2

         At some point Desjardins exited his car, leaving Thistlewood alone in it. Thistlewood

observed a silver truck generally matching the description given by Brewer, but without a tarp, travel


2
 Hayes plausibly explained that officers decided to attempt to gather as much information as possible about Riquinha from his
neighbors, rather than immediately attempting to make contact with anyone who might be in his trailer, because of the potential
dangerousness of the situation given the number of firearms reported stolen.


                                                              4
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 5 of 33                                                  PageID #: 58



down Windsor Drive and pull into the Riquinha driveway, whereupon three people exited and went

into the Riquinha trailer. Thistlewood pulled his unmarked vehicle close enough to the Riquinha

driveway to be able to take down the truck’s license-plate number, then drove to Peckham Street to

inform Hayes and Hickey of the development. 3 At about that time, perhaps because they were

summoned by Desjardins although it is not clear, Hayes, Hickey and Thistlewood left to join

Desjardins at a trailer on another street within The Hamlet, St. James Street, to interview a resident

whom Desjardins thought might have useful information. 4 Desjardins quickly determined that the lead

was not fruitful, whereupon the group returned in their two unmarked vehicles to 16 Windsor Drive.

Thistlewood immediately noticed, and remarked to his companions, that the truck he had earlier

observed was gone. At approximately that time YCSO Deputy Sheriff Stanley Moore joined the group

at the trailer park, pulling his marked cruiser (bearing the words “York County Sheriff’s Office”) in or

near the Riquinha driveway. Moore’s cruiser was the only marked police car of the three present, and

all five officers were in plainclothes.5

          A decision was made to try to make contact with whomever might be inside the Riquinha

residence. While Hayes, Desjardins and Moore stood guard in the yard, Thistlewood and Hickey

approached the front door, knocking and announcing their presence several times. No one answered

or stirred within. They turned to leave. As Thistlewood was walking down the stairs away from the

front door, he observed footprints in a muddy area near the sidewalk that he thought had the same


3
  Thistlewood testified that Desjardins was with him and also observed the truck pulling into the Riquinha driveway and its three
occupants disembarking and going into the house. However, Desjardins was quite clear that he did not personally observe the truck at
that point. I infer that Thistlewood’s memory on this point is faulty, and that in fact he was alone when he made this observation.
4
  Hayes testified that the officers converged at the St. James Street residence because of a reported “disturbance.” However, he had
no memory what the disturbance was. I credit Desjardins’ account that the officers simply went to interview a resident in connection
with the Brewer-Dunning investigation. In any event, Hayes, Thistlewood, Hickey and Desjardins, all of whom testified at the hearing,
agreed that they had gone at this point to St. James Street; the reason is immaterial.
5
  Although in plainclothes, Hayes and Desjardins each wore a necktie with a badge identifying him as a law-enforcement officer.


                                                                 5
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 6 of 33                                                    PageID #: 59



distinctive circular sneaker pattern as footprints he had seen and photographed at the Brewer-Dunning

home. He asked to borrow Hayes’ digital camera, which Hayes retrieved and gave him. The time

was approximately 6:30 p.m. The light was fading, interfering with Thistlewood’s photographic

efforts. While Thistlewood was photographing the footprints, Hayes looked up and saw a silver- or

gray-colored pickup truck, with one male occupant, heading down Windsor Drive in the direction of

the officers. The truck was proceeding at a reasonable rate of speed; however, Hayes noticed that the

driver was staring so fixedly at the group of officers that he was no longer paying attention to the road.

    The driver made an abrupt right-hand turn onto St. James Street (the entrance to which was roughly

across the street from the Riquinha residence) into the path of an oncoming vehicle driven by an

elderly woman. Hayes threw his hands into the air and screamed, “Whoa, whoa, whoa! What are you

doing?” Simultaneously Desjardins, who had also observed this sequence of events, hollered, “Hey!”

or “Yo!” The driver abruptly stopped the truck. It came to rest at a 45-degree angle, encroaching into

the opposite lane of traffic on St. James Street, mere feet from the oncoming vehicle.6

          Desjardins beckoned the driver, whom Hickey described as having a “deer in the headlights”

look on his face, to get out. He did so. Hayes, Desjardins and Hickey approached the driver (whom

all identified in the hearing room as the defendant in this action), and identified themselves to him.

Hayes, whom Desjardins described as “pretty animated,” asked the defendant what his problem was,

stating that he had almost killed a little old lady. The defendant replied that he had just gotten out of

prison, the sight of police made him very nervous, and he had panicked. Upon request, he produced

his driver’s license, which identified him as Richard Dimott, and his vehicle registration.

6
  Desjardins described the driver as having made what appeared to him to be a last-minute decision to turn right on St. James Street, in
that he did not slow much, jerked the vehicle to the right and made an overly wide turn, ending up in the opposite travel lane. Further,
while Desjardins conceded that it is not unusual for people to rubberneck when they observe police officers, Desjardins stated that he
(continued on next page)


                                                                   6
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 7 of 33                                                        PageID #: 60



Thistlewood, who had joined his colleagues near the defendant, told them that the truck was the same

one he had just seen in the Riquinha driveway and that a check of that truck’s license plate had

revealed the vehicle was registered to a Richard Dimott. As Thistlewood approached the truck he

also observed, and pointed out to other officers, that its wheel wells were covered with mud and

grass. Thistlewood noted that Brewer that morning had called YCSO officers’ attention to a track in

the lawn of his Limerick home that appeared to have been created by a spinning tire. While at the

Brewer-Dunning residence, Thistlewood had photographed the track. The defendant’s truck was a

multicolored Ford Ranger – primarily gray or silver but with blue and red stripes along the bottom.

There was no tarp covering the truck bed. However, Thistlewood observed what appeared to be a

black tarp in the truck bed with a tire on top of it. 7

          Hayes patted the defendant down. He noticed that the defendant had trouble making eye

contact or standing still. Hayes gave the defendant’s license and registration to Desjardins, who

radioed WPD dispatch and requested that checks be run on them. The dispatcher informed Desjardins

that the truck was registered to Richard Dimott. No one ultimately cited the defendant for a traffic


____________________________
deemed the defendant’s conduct odd in that he would not take his eyes off of the officers, to the point where it affected his driving and
he almost hit another vehicle.
7
  The defendant called a witness who gave a radically different account of the stopping of his vehicle. Deborah Murchison of 19
Windsor Drive, a neighbor and friend of Riquinha’s wife who knew the defendant as a friend of Riquinha’s, said she was standing in
her driveway on April 5, 2005 watching officers milling about the Riquinha trailer when she heard one of the officers yell, “Stop! Pull
the vehicle over.” She testified that she then saw the nose of a vehicle coming to a stop on Windsor Drive, whereupon she recognized
the driver as the defendant. She said that at that point she saw several law-enforcement officers walk alongside the vehicle as the
defendant drove it over to St. James Street, parking it at about a forty-five degree angle encroaching into the opposite travel lane. She
denied that she heard any officer yell, “Whoa! Whoa! Whoa! What are you doing?” or saw any near-accident between the
defendant’s truck and another vehicle. I do not find her account of the manner in which the truck was stopped credible. While
Murchison claimed to have heard officers order the truck to stop, she later stated that she could not hear anything after the stopping of
the truck because it was “quite a ways off.” Further, her testimony conflicts with that of all other eyewitnesses to that event, who were
closer to the truck and who uniformly testified that the defendant made a sudden right-hand turn onto St. James Street, where he
stopped in the nick of time to avoid a collision with another car. Finally, if officers did in fact stop the truck on Windsor Drive, it makes
no sense that they would have directed the defendant to position it at a forty-five angle, encroaching into the wrong lane of an adjacent
street.


                                                                     7
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 8 of 33                                                  PageID #: 61



violation. 8 Desjardins did not retain the defendant’s license and registration, although he could not

recall if he returned them to the defendant, left them in his truck or gave them to another officer.

          Hayes asked the defendant where he was coming from and where he was headed. The

defendant said he had come from South Portland and was there to visit a friend. Hayes or one of the

other officers also asked whether the defendant had been to the Riquinha residence. He denied that he

had been. Hayes informed the defendant that Thistlewood earlier had observed his truck parked in the

Riquinha driveway. The defendant then admitted that he had been there. Hayes also told the defendant

that his truck matched the description of a vehicle seen leaving the scene of a burglary. He asked the

defendant if he was aware of a burglary in which guns were taken or if his vehicle was involved in the

commission of a burglary. The defendant denied any involvement and stated that he did not let anyone

use his vehicle.

          Hayes asked the defendant if officers could search his truck. Without hesitation, the defendant

agreed. No one asked the defendant to sign a consent-to-search form. Approximately five to ten

minutes had elapsed since the defendant had stopped his truck on St. James Street. Thistlewood and

Moore began to search the cab of the truck. At about that time Michael Grasso, another ATF special

agent, arrived on the scene, dressed in plainclothes and driving an unmarked vehicle. Grasso

introduced himself to the defendant, who was sitting on a curb not far from his truck. While the

vehicle search was still under way, Grasso overheard the defendant asking if he was free to leave.

Grasso recollected one of the other officers telling the defendant, “Hold on a second. We’ll tell you

what’s going on.” At about that time the defendant struck up a conversation with Hickey, inquiring,

among other things, why ATF was involved.

8
  Hickey recalled that at least one officer checked on the status of the driver of the vehicle the defendant nearly hit, and that she
(continued on next page)


                                                                 8
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 9 of 33                                                     PageID #: 62



          Thistlewood quickly made two significant discoveries, which he shared with Hayes and other

officers. He found an antique Rolls-brand razor and cans of mace identical to a can left at the Brewer-

Dunning residence during the break-in, which was believed to have been used to mace the family’s

dog. Thistlewood asked the defendant about those items. He said he knew nothing about them, they

did not belong to him, and he did not know why they were in his vehicle. Thistlewood next phoned

Brewer and asked him to describe the stolen Rolls razor. Brewer provided a detailed description

consistent with the item Thistlewood had just seized – noting, for instance, that a serial number on the

side of the razor had been worn from constant handling. Thistlewood thereupon informed the

defendant that he believed his truck contained stolen property. The defendant denied any involvement.

Convinced that he had just recovered stolen property, Thistlewood decided to terminate the search,

secure the truck and seek a warrant to search it more thoroughly. He asked Moore to take the razor to

Brewer for an identification, and Desjardins to arrange for the truck’s impoundment.                                                 At

approximately 7 p.m., Desjardins radioed WPD dispatch to request that a tow truck be sent to the

scene to impound the defendant’s vehicle.

          The defendant asked whether he was free to go. Thistlewood told him that he was.9 He asked

if he could take his vehicle. Thistlewood replied, “No.” The defendant announced that he wanted to

cooperate with the investigation. However, he said he did not want to talk at the scene, in sight of

residents who had come out to observe the goings-on. Desjardins suggested that they talk at the WPD

station, but the defendant declined. The defendant pointed to Hickey and said he wanted to talk to him

alone. Hickey and the defendant repaired to a grassy area at the edge of the road, out of earshot of


____________________________
reported she was fine. She backed up, pulled around the pickup truck and went on her way.
9
  Thistlewood testified that although he was convinced that the vehicle was involved in the burglary, he could not at that point link the
defendant directly to it. He said that the defendant repeatedly asked him if he was free to leave, and he repeatedly told him he was.


                                                                   9
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 10 of 33                                                   PageID #: 63



other officers.10 As they did so, Hickey noticed part of a tarp (which Hickey described as blue)

protruding from beneath a spare tire in the defendant’s truck bed.

          The defendant told Hickey he wanted to “run over some options.” He seemed to Hickey to be

under the misimpression that ATF, as a federal agency, could override the decision of the county and

local agencies to impound his truck. Hickey explained that ATF had no authority over those agencies.

He told the defendant that with that many firearms involved, ATF’s priority was getting them off the

streets before something happened with them. While conversing on the grass, the defendant also told

Hickey: “I want to speak hypothetically.” Hickey replied that he did not know what the defendant

meant by that, but the defendant could do that.

          While the defendant and Hickey conversed at The Hamlet, the defendant asked Hickey at least

twice whether he was under arrest. Hickey told him that ATF did not plan to arrest him that day unless

something changed significantly. The defendant also asked at one point if he could leave. Hickey told

him he was free to go; however, Hickey had also previously advised him that it looked fairly bad for

him as far as his involvement in the burglary, that Hickey did not believe he was the ringleader, and

that any information the defendant gave would be relayed to the United States Attorney’s Office and

most likely work in his favor.

          After a period of time, Grasso joined Hickey and the defendant. The defendant told both

agents that if he was to help them, he wanted to leave the location. He suggested that he and Hickey go

for a ride, noting that he did not want any of the local officers involved. Hickey told the defendant

that, per standard ATF officer-safety protocol, two agents (both himself and Grasso) would need to

accompany the defendant. The defendant agreed, and the three departed the scene in Grasso’s

10
  At hearing Desjardins voiced the opinion, as a detective who had been involved peripherally in the burglary investigation, that from
(continued on next page)


                                                                 10
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 11 of 33                                                       PageID #: 64



vehicle.11 At approximately 7:30 p.m. – it is not clear whether just before or just after the defendant

departed with the ATF agents – a tow-truck operator arrived and removed the defendant’s vehicle

from The Hamlet.12 The other officers dispersed. Hayes, for example, went home for the night, and

Thistlewood returned to the WPD. During the period of time the defendant was at The Hamlet with

officers, no one told him he was under arrest. 13

          It is standard ATF protocol, when transporting a suspect who is in custody in an unmarked

vehicle with no cage, for the suspect to be handcuffed and for one agent to sit in the backseat with him.

 In this case, although Grasso’s vehicle had no cage, Hickey sat in front with Grasso while the

defendant sat alone in the backseat. The defendant was not placed in handcuffs. The defendant said he

was thirsty, and Grasso drove to a convenience store. All three exited the car and went inside. The

defendant was free to move about the store. One of the agents bought him a drink, and the three

returned to the car, resuming the same seats as before.

          Grasso had the impression that, commencing at the time the defendant first began speaking with

ATF agents at The Hamlet, he was “playing a little game with us,” giving out limited amounts of

information in piecemeal fashion and trying to discover what the agents knew. The defendant initially

denied any involvement in the burglary. Later, he admitted that his vehicle had been used in the

____________________________
his observations at The Hamlet the defendant was controlling the situation.
11
   The defendant initially asked if he could go for a ride with the agents in his own vehicle. Hickey again advised him that was a state or
local issue and not one in which ATF could intercede on his behalf.
12
   Richard Grovo, the Maietta Towing employee who removed the defendant’s truck from The Hamlet on April 5, 2005, testified that
one person was in handcuffs at the scene. However, when pressed on cross-examination how he knew the person was handcuffed, he
made clear that he had assumed this was so because the person’s hands were behind his back. He admitted that he had not actually
seen handcuffs and had not seen the person’s back, and that it was possible the person merely had put his own hands behind his back.
 Inasmuch as Grovo did not actually see handcuffs on the defendant, and his testimony conflicts with that of other eyewitnesses who
denied that the defendant was handcuffed at any time while at The Hamlet, I do not credit it.
13
   Both Grovo and Murchison testified that they observed an unmarked law-enforcement vehicle or vehicles blocking one or both ends
of the defendant’s truck while it was parked on St. James Street. Desjardins, a generally credible witness, denied this. Such
positioning, if done, would have been consistent with the decision to impound the truck. Thus I find that, if the defendant’s truck was
blocked, it was blocked following the decision to seize it.


                                                                   11
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 12 of 33                                                   PageID #: 65



commission of that crime. Eventually, he said he could tell the agents who had used his vehicle.

However, he asked for an opportunity to phone people to give them a chance to do the right thing

before naming names, reiterating that he wanted to see his child that night. Still later, he told Hickey

and Grasso that they did not need to worry about guns being on the street. He said that he knew where

all twenty-six firearms were, and offered to take the agents to them. 14 The ATF agents, who had

remained in touch with Thistlewood during their ride with the defendant, contacted him to meet with

them. Thistlewood, who was not familiar with Westbrook, suggested he meet them in the parking lot

of the Hannaford store in Westbrook, which he knew he could find. Upon Thistlewood’s arrival, he

was advised that the defendant would lead investigators to the stolen firearms if he did not get arrested

that evening for receiving stolen property. Thistlewood got into the backseat of Grasso’s vehicle;

however, the defendant soon asked him to leave. Thistlewood promptly did so. He got back into his

own vehicle and waited.15

          After five or ten more minutes, the defendant said he would take the agents to the location of

the guns. He directed Grasso to Trailers Diversified, a storage facility in Gorham, Maine.

Thistlewood followed behind in his own vehicle.16 On arrival, the ATF agents called others to the

storage facility, including their supervisor David Brown, ATF resident agent-in-charge. The

defendant told Hickey and Grasso they would find twenty-three guns in a storage unit there. Grasso

asked where the other three firearms were; the defendant said they were in his truck. The defendant

14
   No explanation was given at hearing for the discrepancy between Brewer’s report that twenty-one firearms were missing and the
defendant’s statement to ATF agents that he knew where all twenty-six firearms were. In any event, the discrepancy is immaterial.
15
   Thistlewood also testified, on both direct and cross-examination, that he might have seen the defendant at the WPD prior to seeing
him at the Hannaford parking lot but was not sure that he had. Inasmuch as he was uncertain whether he had in fact seen the defendant
at the WPD, and neither Grasso nor Hickey testified that they had taken the defendant there, I find that the defendant was not brought
to the WPD after leaving The Hamlet.
16
   Both Hickey and Grasso denied that they had promised the defendant that if he told them where the guns were, he would not be
arrested. They testified that the defendant queried whether, if he took them to the firearms, he would not be arrested, whereupon
(continued on next page)


                                                                 12
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 13 of 33                                                     PageID #: 66



identified the storage unit in which the firearms were stored and provided the agents with a key that he

reassured them was the only key to the unit. As the agents waited for their supervisor, Brown, to

arrive, Hickey began asking pointed questions about the burglary. During that conversation, for about

five minutes, the defendant framed his replies in hypothetical terms.17 Grasso recalled the defendant at

one point asking, “Can I have a ride out of here?” and being told: “Let us just get this settled, and we’ll

talk about where we’ll go.” While conversing with Hickey, the defendant was sitting in the backseat

of Grasso’s car. However, he had not been ordered to remain there, and both doors were open.

          After consulting with an Assistant United States Attorney, ATF agents decided, in view of the

lateness of the hour, to secure the storage unit (by posting guards outside of it) pending issuance of a

search warrant, which they would seek the following morning. At no time on April 5, 2005 did

Grasso or Hickey read the defendant Miranda rights.18 The ATF did not place the defendant under

arrest that day. However, at approximately 10 p.m. – about a half an hour after the defendant’s arrival

at the storage facility – Thistlewood arrested him on state burglary charges. For the first time since

encountering officers earlier in the day, the defendant was placed in handcuffs. Thistlewood arrested

the defendant at the direction of his YCSO supervisor, who expressed concern that the defendant

would try to leave. Thistlewood transported the defendant in handcuffs to the York County Jail. He

did not at any time that day advise the defendant of Miranda rights. Thistlewood recalled no

conversation relevant to the federal investigation transpiring during the trip to jail. He did tell the

____________________________
Hickey again reiterated that ATF had no intention of arresting him that evening unless something changed significantly.
17
   For example, when Hickey asked what the defendant was doing at the Brewer-Dunning residence, the defendant responded:
“Hypothetically, the guy’s a drug dealer, what do you think we went there for?” Hickey answered, “cash,” whereupon the defendant
stated: “Hypothetically, yes, but since there was no cash, we’d take the guns, hypothetically.”
18
   Per Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), an accused must be advised prior to custodial interrogation “that he has the right to
remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and
that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at
478-79.


                                                                  13
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 14 of 33                                  PageID #: 67



defendant he would be interested in talking to him about the case. The defendant replied that he did

not want to talk to him that night but would do so the next day. When Thistlewood came to the jail the

following day, the defendant refused to speak with him.

            On the morning of April 6, 2005 ATF agents applied to this court for a warrant to search the

storage unit and the defendant’s pickup truck, on the strength of an affidavit signed by Hickey. Hickey

related, inter alia:

            1.        Brewer’s three reports to the YCSO, including the report on April 5, 2005 that the

residence had been broken into and a number of items taken, including twenty-one firearms and an

antique Rolls razor; the tracing of blocked calls placed to the Brewer-Dunning residence on March 26,

2005 and April 5, 2005 to Riquinha; and Brewer’s and Dunning’s observation while traveling down

Sokokis Trail back toward their home on the morning of the burglary of a small gray pickup truck with

a blue tarp over the bed traveling toward them (and away from the direction of their residence). See

Application and Affidavit of Stephen E. Hickey, Jr. (“Hickey Aff.”) (Docket No. 1), United States v.

Dimott, Magistrate No. 05-30-WSB (D. Me.), ¶¶ 3-4, 6.19

            2.        Observation at the Brewer-Dunning residence, following the burglary, of (i) a can of

mace that did not belong to Brewer or Dunning, (ii) a sneaker print with spirals in the snow near the

location of the break-in, and (iii) marks on the side lawn that appeared to have been caused by a

vehicle leaving at a high rate of speed. See id. ¶ 5.

            3.        Observation by Thistlewood, while watching the Riquinha residence, that a small, gray

pickup truck (with no tarp) matching the description given by Brewer and Dunning had pulled into the

driveway and three occupants had exited and gone into the Riquinha residence; and discovery by


19
     The Hickey affidavit contains two paragraphs numbered 3. See Hickey Aff. I refer to both.


                                                                14
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 15 of 33                                                   PageID #: 68



Thistlewood and Desjardins that the vehicle was registered to the defendant. See id. ¶ 7.

          4.           Hickey’s observation while at the Riquinha residence that the gray pickup truck was

making its way down Windsor Drive, then swerved quickly to the right onto a side street, nearly

striking another vehicle, whereupon Hayes called the driver out of the truck and identified him as its

registered owner, the defendant. See id. ¶¶ 8-9.20

          5.        Observation by Thistlewood of fresh mud and short blades of lawn grass that appeared

to match that of the side lawn of the Brewer-Dunning residence on the right rear-quarter panel of the

truck, see id. ¶ 10, as well as Thistlewood’s observation while at the Riquinha residence of a sneaker

footprint in the mud just below the lowest porch step identical to the print observed at the Brewer-

Dunning residence, see id. ¶ 8.

          6.        Discovery by Thistlewood, after obtaining consent from the defendant to a search of the

truck, of three cans of mace matching the can found in the room where stolen firearms were located

and of an antique Rolls razor. See id. ¶ 10.

          7.        Details of Hickey’s interview of the defendant, including the defendant’s willingness to

provide a key to the Trailers Diversified storage unit in which he said twenty-three of the guns were

located “as long as he would not be arrested[,]” and confirmation from the owners of Trailers

Diversified that the storage unit was leased to Riquinha. See id. ¶¶ 11-12.

          At 10:43 a.m. United States Magistrate Judge William S. Brownell issued the requested

warrant. See Search Warrant, attached to id. Grasso was among those present when the storage unit,

which contained firearms, tools and household goods, was opened later that day. Hickey inventoried

items removed from the storage unit, and returned the warrant to Magistrate Judge Brownell on April

20
  Hickey was mistaken in stating that Hayes called the defendant out of his truck. Hayes testified that he did not do so. However, the
(continued on next page)


                                                                 15
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 16 of 33                                                  PageID #: 69



8, 2005. See Defendant’s Exh. 2. Judge Brownell was not personally present when Hickey conducted

the inventory; however, Hickey verified to Judge Brownell that it was an accurate inventory. See id.

at 3. The return reflects that the inventory was made in the presence of ATF supervising agent Brown.

See id.

                                                        II. Discussion

                                                    A. Dimott I Motion

          The government objects to the Dimott I Motion on the basis that it has no bearing on the Dimott

I charge. See Government’s Response to Defendant’s Motion To Suppress, etc. (Docket No. 17),

Dimott I. I agree. The defendant’s identical suppression motions target the conduct of YCSO, WPD

and ATF officers and agents on April 5, 2005. See generally Dimott I Motion; Dimott II Motion. The

Dimott I indictment charges that on or about March 2, 2006 the defendant knowingly disobeyed an

order of conditions of release by absconding from home confinement. See Indictment (Docket No. 1),

Dimott I. The defendant does not elucidate, and I cannot discern, how statements he made, and

evidence seized, in Westbrook and Gorham, Maine on April 5, 2005 have any relevance to the Dimott

I criminal contempt-of-court charge. Accordingly, I recommend that the Dimott I Motion be denied.

Alternatively, assuming arguendo that the evidence sought to be suppressed does have some bearing

on the Dimott I charge, I recommend that the Dimott I Motion be denied for the reasons discussed

below.

                                                   B. Dimott II Motion

          With respect to Dimott II, the defendant seeks to suppress evidence on the bases that officers

(i) detained him without reasonable and articulable suspicion and subsequently arrested him without

____________________________
discrepancy is immaterial inasmuch as another officer, Desjardins, testified that he did beckon the defendant to step outside.


                                                                16
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 17 of 33                                                   PageID #: 70



probable cause, (ii) searched his truck without either a warrant, probable cause or valid consent, and

the search was in any event the fruit of the illegal stop, (iii) elicited statements from him involuntarily

and in the absence of required Miranda warnings, (iv) relied on a search-warrant affidavit that, when

stripped of illegally obtained evidence, does not establish probable cause to search the vehicle and

storage unit, and (v) inventoried items seized pursuant to the search warrant in a manner that did not

comport with the requirements of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 41(f)(1) and (2). See, e.g.,

Dimott II Motion.21

          The government rejoins that officers (i) had reasonable articulable suspicion, if not probable

cause, to stop the defendant’s vehicle, remove him from it, pat him down and conduct a brief

investigation, (ii) obtained the defendant’s lawful consent to a search of his truck (and, alternatively,

evidence then seized is admissible pursuant to the so-called inevitable-discovery rule), (iii) were not

required to provide the defendant Miranda warnings because he was not “in custody” until 10 p.m. on

April 5, 2005, (iv) did not coerce any statement from the defendant, (v) relied, for search of the

vehicle and storage unit, on an affidavit supplying probable cause for the search (and, alternatively,

evidence seized during those searches is admissible pursuant to the so-called “good faith” exception

to the exclusionary rule), and (v) executed the warrant for search of the storage unit in conformity with

Rule 41(f). See, e.g., Government’s Objection to Defendant’s Motion To Suppress, etc. (“Dimott II

Objection”) (Docket No. 18), Dimott II.

          The government bears the burden of proving (i) Miranda compliance, see, e.g., United States

v. Barone, 968 F.2d 1378, 1384 (1st Cir. 1992), (ii) the voluntariness of a confession, see, e.g.,

United States v. Jackson, 918 F.2d 236, 241 (1st Cir. 1990), and (iii) the lawfulness of warrantless

21
  I use the term “officers” to refer to any or all law-enforcement officers involved in the Brewer-Dunning investigation on April 5-6,
(continued on next page)


                                                                 17
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 18 of 33                           PageID #: 71



searches and seizures, see, e.g., United States v. Ramos-Morales, 981 F.2d 625, 628 (1st Cir. 1992).

With respect to the defendant’s challenge to the lawfulness of searches undertaken pursuant to the

warrant issued on April 6, 2005, he bears the initial burden of demonstrating the warrant’s invalidity.

See, e.g., United States v. Longmire, 761 F.2d 411, 417 (7th Cir.1985) (“The general federal rule on

who bears the burden of proof with respect to an allegedly illegal search or seizure is based upon the

warrant-no warrant dichotomy: If the search or seizure was effected pursuant to a warrant, the

defendant bears the burden of proving its illegality; if the police acted without a warrant, the

prosecution bears the burden of establishing legality.”); see also, e.g., United States v. Koerth, 312

F.3d 862, 868 (7th Cir. 2002) (“If a defendant is successful in establishing the invalidity of the search

warrant, the burden then shifts to the Government to establish that the police relied in good faith on the

judge’s decision to accept the affidavit and issue the warrant.”). With respect to the defendant’s Rule

41(f) challenge, a defendant bears “the burden of proof in challenging the validity of the execution or

service of the search warrant.” United States v. Marx, 635 F.2d 436, 441 (5th Cir. 1981).

         For the reasons that follow, I find that the government meets its burden of demonstrating the

lawfulness of officers’ conduct with respect to warrantless searches and seizures (including

investigative detention), voluntariness of statements and Miranda compliance on April 5, 2005, and

that the defendant falls short of meeting his burden of demonstrating the invalidity of searches and

seizures conducted pursuant to the warrant issued on April 6, 2005.

                               1. Investigative Detention; Ultimate Arrest

         The defendant first contends that, in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights, he was

(i) unlawfully detained at The Hamlet without reasonable, articulable suspicion and (ii) ultimately

____________________________
2005, including YCSO, WPD and ATF agents, detectives and officers.


                                                          18
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 19 of 33                         PageID #: 72



placed under de facto arrest in the absence of probable cause. See Dimott II Motion at 3-4.

       The First Circuit has observed:

       In Terry v. Ohio, [392 U.S. 1 (1968)], the Supreme Court first recognized that a police
       officer may in appropriate circumstances and in an appropriate manner approach a
       person for purposes of investigating possibly criminal behavior even though there is no
       probable cause to make an arrest. This authority permits officers to stop and briefly
       detain a person for investigative purposes, and diligently pursue a means of
       investigation likely to confirm or dispel their suspicions quickly.

United States v. Trueber, 238 F.3d 79, 91-92 (1st Cir. 2001) (citations and internal punctuation

omitted). As the First Circuit has further elaborated:

       The law governing investigative stops is well understood. A law enforcement officer
       ordinarily may not stop someone and restrain his freedom to walk away unless the
       officer has a reasonable and articulable suspicion of criminal activity. The reasonable
       suspicion test has been described as an intermediate standard requiring more than
       unfounded speculation but less than probable cause. At a minimum, the officer must
       have a particularized and objective basis for suspicion. When determining the
       legitimacy of an investigative stop, a court must undertake a contextual analysis using
       common sense and a degree of deference to the expertise that informs a law
       enforcement officer’s judgments about suspicious behavior.

       An investigative stop also must be reasonably related in scope to the circumstances
       which justified the interference in the first place. If a law enforcement officer
       reasonably suspects criminal activity, he may briefly question the suspect about his
       concerns. If he has a reasonable basis to suspect that the subject of his inquiry may be
       armed, he also may frisk the suspect and undertake a limited search of the passenger
       compartment of any vehicle in which he is sitting. Once again, context is vital in
       determining the permissible scope of an investigative stop.

United States v. Cook, 277 F.3d 82, 85 (1st Cir. 2002) (citations and internal quotation marks

omitted). In this case, the defendant technically stopped his own vehicle to avoid a near-collision,

rather than being pulled over by police. Nonetheless, Desjardins immediately beckoned him out of his

truck, and Hayes questioned him, patted him down and requested consent to search his vehicle. The

encounter thus fairly can be characterized as an investigative, or Terry, stop.

       As an initial matter, officers were justified in approaching and questioning the defendant on the


                                                  19
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 20 of 33                         PageID #: 73



basis of his erratic driving alone. The defendant had made a sudden, wide right turn, encroaching on

the wrong travel lane of St. James Street and nearly striking another vehicle. Even in the absence of

any suspected link whatsoever to the Brewer-Dunning investigation, officers reasonably could have

stopped and questioned the driver to satisfy themselves that he was not operating under the influence

of drugs or alcohol or otherwise unfit to be behind the wheel.

       Beyond this, even as officers approached the truck, Thistlewood observed and commented that

the vehicle was the same one he had just seen in the Riquinha driveway, which he had determined was

registered to a Richard Dimott. That vehicle, in turn, generally matched Brewer’s description of a

truck seen in the vicinity of his home shortly before he discovered the break-in: Although the

defendant’s vehicle was a Ford rather than a Chevrolet, did not have a tarp over the truck bed and had

red and blue stripes along the bottom, it was primarily a silver or gray pickup truck. Officers already

knew that the cell phone from which blocked calls had been placed to the Brewer-Dunning residence

belonged to Riquinha. Moreover, Thistlewood had just been in the process of photographing a

footprint near the Riquinha trailer that he reasonably could have inferred had been left by one of the

three individuals he had seen exiting the Dimott vehicle a short time earlier, and that he believed was

identical to a distinctive footprint he had seen at the Brewer-Dunning residence.

       The defendant’s own conduct only heightened officers’ growing and ample suspicions. He had

stared so fixedly at them and their vehicles (including the marked YCSO cruiser) that he neglected to

pay attention to the road. He also had made what Desjardins reasonably deduced was a last-minute

decision to turn right onto St. James Street, nearly striking an oncoming vehicle. The defendant’s

apparent attempted flight was in itself, in the circumstances, highly suspicious. See, e.g., Illinois v.

Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 124 (2000) (“Headlong flight – wherever it occurs – is the consummate act of

evasion: It is not necessarily indicative of wrongdoing, but it is certainly suggestive of such.”).

                                                  20
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 21 of 33                        PageID #: 74



       In short, as officers approached the defendant, they had ample reason to suspect that he and/or

his vehicle were linked to the Brewer-Dunning burglary. They then did precisely what Terry

contemplates, undertaking diligent means of investigation to confirm or dispel that suspicion. They

questioned the defendant, ran a check of his license and registration, made observations of the outside

of his vehicle and sought his consent to search his truck. Those measures, in turn, quickly confirmed

their suspicions. Thistlewood observed mud and grass on the truck’s wheel well; earlier that day, he

had photographed a track on the Brewer-Dunning lawn believed to have been left by a spinning tire.

Thistlewood and Hickey both noticed a tarp protruding from beneath a spare tire in the truck bed; the

truck seen by Brewer reportedly had a tarp covering its truck bed. During questioning the defendant

appeared nervous and had trouble making eye contact or standing still. He gave shifting answers to the

questions posed – initially denying that he had been to the Riquinha residence and then admitting that

he had in fact been there when confronted with the observation that Thistlewood earlier had seen his

vehicle parked in the Riquinha driveway. Finally, during the search of the truck’s cab, Thistlewood

discovered what fairly can be described as smoking-gun evidence of a link between the defendant’s

truck and the Brewer-Dunning burglary: cans of mace identical to a can found at the Brewer-Dunning

residence that did not belong to either Brewer or Dunning and had been believed to have been used to

mace their dog, and an antique Rolls razor that Thistlewood confirmed, in a conversation with

Brewer, was his. No more than half an hour had elapsed since officers first had approached the

defendant.

       At this point – if not sooner – officers had probable cause to arrest the defendant on state

charges of burglary and/or receipt of stolen property. See United States v. Vongkaysone, 434 F.3d

68, 73-74 (1st Cir. 2006) (“Probable cause exists when police officers, relying on reasonably

trustworthy facts and circumstances, have information upon which a reasonably prudent person would

                                                  21
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 22 of 33                            PageID #: 75



believe the suspect had committed or was committing a crime. The inquiry into probable cause

focuses on what the officer knew at the time of the arrest, and should evaluate the totality of the

circumstances. Probable cause is a common sense, nontechnical conception that deals with the factual

and practical considerations of everyday life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal

technicians, act.”) (citations and internal punctuation omitted); United States v. Winchenbach, 197

F.3d 548, 555-56 (1st Cir. 1999) (an officer’s determination that a crime has been committed need not

be “ironclad” or even “highly probable”; it need only have been “reasonable” to satisfy the standard

of probable cause); Roche v. John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co., 81 F.3d 249, 255 (1st Cir. 1996)

(“[O]ne who asserts the existence of probable cause is not a guarantor either of the accuracy of the

information upon which he has reasonably relied or of the ultimate conclusion that he reasonably drew

therefrom.”). However, rather than placing the defendant under arrest then and there, in an abundance

of caution Thistlewood decided to impound his vehicle, seek a warrant for its further search, and

leave the defendant to his liberty. At that point, the Terry stop had ceased. Nonetheless, officers did

not then proceed, as the defendant suggests in his papers, see Dimott II Motion at 4, to effectuate his de

facto arrest.

        “[A]n investigatory stop constitutes a de facto arrest [for which probable cause is required]

when a reasonable man in the suspect’s position would have understood his situation, in the

circumstances then obtaining, to be tantamount to being under arrest.” Flowers v. Fiore, 359 F.3d 24,

29 (1st Cir. 2004) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). There is no evidence that any

officer laid a hand on the defendant while at The Hamlet, apart from Hayes’ brief patdown. The

patdown did not “convert” the Terry stop into an arrest; rather, it constituted a legitimate officer-safety

measure in view of the fact that officers harbored reasonable suspicion that the defendant was linked

to a burglary in which twenty-one firearms had been reported stolen. See, e.g., Florida v. J.L., 529

                                                    22
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 23 of 33                         PageID #: 76



U.S. 266, 272 (2000) (given serious threat firearms and armed criminals pose to public safety,

“Terry’s rule . . . permits protective police searches on the basis of reasonable suspicion rather than

demanding that officers meet the higher standard of probable cause”); United States v. Romain, 393

F.3d 63, 71 (1st Cir. 2004) (“[I]n determining whether a pat-down search is an appropriate step

following a valid Terry stop, the key is whether, under the circumstances, the officer is justified in

believing that the person is armed and dangerous to the officer or others.”) (citation and internal

quotation marks omitted). Nor did any officer brandish a weapon at the defendant, place him

handcuffs, inform him that he was under arrest or otherwise restrict his freedom of movement. Indeed,

when the defendant questioned Thistlewood following termination of the truck search whether he was

free to go, Thistlewood confirmed that he was. While the defendant could not have driven out of The

Hamlet in his own truck, which had been seized, he could have called a friend, relative or cab for a

ride or simply have walked out of the trailer park. No reasonable person in the defendant’s shoes, as

of that time, would have understood his situation to be tantamount to being under arrest.

       Instead, from all that appears, the defendant made a calculated choice to stay and attempt to

minimize the damage emanating from his chance encounter with police by cooperating with ATF

agents. From the time the Terry stopped ceased at approximately 7 p.m. until the time the defendant

was placed under arrest by Thistlewood in Gorham at approximately 10 p.m., he was calling the shots:

He identified Hickey as the sole person with whom he wished to speak and conversed with him out of

earshot of other officers; he suggested that he go for a ride with Hickey; he gave permission for Grasso

to join them; he refused to deal with local or county officers; he ordered Thistlewood out of the

backseat of Grasso’s car; and he attempted unsuccessfully to negotiate the release of his truck and a

guarantee that he would not be arrested that day. The defendant repeatedly asked Grasso and Hickey

whether he was under arrest or would be placed under arrest; they repeatedly assured him that absent

                                                  23
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 24 of 33                         PageID #: 77



a significant change, ATF had no plans to arrest him that day. Nothing Grasso or Hickey did was

inconsistent with that assurance. In contravention of ATF protocol for transport of suspects “in

custody,” they left the defendant alone and unhandcuffed in the backseat of Grasso’s car. They also

permitted him to walk freely about a convenience store at which they stopped to obtain a drink, and

did nothing to physically restrain him while at Trailers Diversified in Gorham.

        In short, the defendant was not placed under de facto arrest at any time prior to his official

arrest by Thistlewood at approximately 10 p.m. There can be no serious question that, when

Thistlewood did arrest the defendant that evening on a state charge of burglary, he had probable cause

to do so. As noted earlier, such probable cause had been developed, at the latest, as of the time the

Terry stop ceased at approximately 7 p.m. The defendant’s conduct and statements during the

intervening time had only widened the base of probable cause: The defendant had confessed he knew

who had committed the burglary, had led agents to the storage unit where he said twenty-three of the

guns were stored, had produced what he represented was the only key to the unit, and had stated that

three other guns would be found in his truck.

        For all of the foregoing reasons, the government carries its burden of demonstrating that the

defendant was neither unlawfully detained nor arrested during his encounter with officers on April 5,

2005.

                                         2. Search of Truck

        The defendant next argues that the search of his truck was unlawful on grounds, inter alia, that

any purported consent was involuntary. See Dimott II Motion at 4-5. He argues that consent given

during an illegal detention is invalid, and that any evidence discovered as a result of such a search is

inadmissible unless the taint of the illegal conduct is somehow dissipated. See id. (citing, inter alia,

Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471 (1963)); see also, e.g., United States v. Woodward, 173 F.

                                                  24
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 25 of 33                                              PageID #: 78



Supp.2d 64, 71 (D. Me. 2001), aff’d, 43 Fed. Appx. 397 (1st Cir. 2002) (evidence is suppressible as

fruit of poisonous tree, pursuant to Wong Sun, if it has “been come at by exploitation of the illegality

as opposed to by means sufficiently distinguishable to be purged of the primary taint”) (citation and

internal punctuation omitted). The government counters, inter alia, that the defendant gave valid

consent to the search. See Dimott II Objection at 9-10.

         “Valid consent renders a warrantless search constitutionally permissible, and while consent

must be voluntary to be valid, there is no requirement that the person who gave consent must have been

explicitly advised of the right to withhold it.” United States v. Perez-Montañez, 202 F.3d 434, 438

(1st Cir. 2000). “It is the prosecution’s burden to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that

consent was freely and voluntarily given; there must be more than mere acquiescence in the face of an

unfounded claim of present lawful authority.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).22

“The district court’s conclusion as to whether consent was freely given must take into account the

totality of the circumstances surrounding the interaction between the defendant and the authorities.” Id.

 This interaction, in turn, is measured by a standard of “objective reasonableness – what would the

typical reasonable person have understood by the exchange between the officer and the suspect?”

United States v. Turner, 169 F.3d 84, 87 (1st Cir. 1999) (citations and internal quotation marks

omitted).

         At the outset, I reject the defendant’s contention that his consent was “fruit of the poisonous

tree.” I have already concluded, based on the facts as I propose they be found, that the detention of the

defendant at The Hamlet was lawful. The question remains whether the defendant voluntarily

22
  While the question sometimes is framed as one of whether consent has been “freely and voluntarily” given, the concepts are
equivalent. See, e.g., United States v. Drayton, 536 U.S. 194, 206 (2002) (“We turn now from the question whether respondents
were seized to whether they were subjected to an unreasonable search, i.e., whether their consent to the suspicionless search was
(continued on next page)


                                                              25
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 26 of 33                                                     PageID #: 79



consented to the search.               At hearing, the government adduced uncontradicted evidence that

approximately five to ten minutes after officers first approached the defendant, Hayes asked him for

consent to search his truck, which he gave without hesitation. There is no evidence that the officers

said or did anything to coerce the defendant to give that consent unwillingly. Moreover, throughout the

defendant’s encounter with officers that day, he evinced a willingness and ability to cooperate to the

extent it suited his purposes and to decline to cooperate when it did not – for example, choosing to

deal with Hickey but not with local or county officers. Against this backdrop, I have no difficulty

concluding that the defendant consented to a search of his truck, and did so voluntarily. The truck

search accordingly was lawful.

                            3. Voluntariness of Statements; Miranda Compliance

          The defendant next seeks to suppress statements made to officers on April 5, 2005 on the bases

that (i) requisite Miranda warnings were not given, and (ii) his statements in any event were

involuntary, having been coerced by promises of leniency. See Dimott II Motion at 5-6.

          The obligation of an officer to administer Miranda warnings attaches “only where there has

been such a restriction on a person’s freedom as to render him ‘in custody.’” Stansbury v. California,

511 U.S. 318, 322 (1994) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Whether a person can be

considered to have been in custody depends on all of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation,

but “the ultimate inquiry is simply whether there [was] a ‘formal arrest or restraint on freedom of

movement’ of the degree associated with a formal arrest.” Id. (citation omitted). The determination

whether there was such a restraint on freedom of movement hinges “on the objective circumstances of

the interrogation, not on the subjective views harbored by either the interrogating officers or the

____________________________
involuntary.”); United States v. Chhien, 266 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2001) (“Consent is voluntary if it is the product of an essentially free
(continued on next page)


                                                                  26
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 27 of 33                         PageID #: 80



person being questioned.” Id. at 323. See also United States v. Quinn, 815 F.2d 153, 157 (1st Cir.

1987) (relevant inquiry “is how a reasonable man in the suspect’s position would have understood his

situation”) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). “Among the factors to consider” in making

a Miranda custody determination “are whether the suspect was questioned in familiar or at least

neutral surroundings, the number of law enforcement officers present at the scene, the degree of

physical restraint placed upon the suspect, and the duration and character of the interrogation.” United

States v. Nishnianidze, 342 F.3d 6, 13 (1st Cir. 2003) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

          For purposes of Miranda analysis, the defendant’s interactions with officers on April 5, 2005

can be divided into three periods: (i) the period from approximately 6:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. during which

officers conducted a Terry-type investigation, (ii) the period from approximately 7 p.m. to 10 p.m.

during which the defendant conversed with ATF agents, and (iii) the period after 10 p.m., when

Thistlewood placed the defendant under arrest. At no point during the day did any officer administer

Miranda warnings to the defendant.

          The defendant acknowledges that, as “a general rule, Terry stops do not implicate the

requirements of Miranda.” Dimott II Motion at 5 (quoting United States v. Streifel, 781 F.2d 953,

958 (1st Cir. 1986)). However, he posits that in this case, the Terry stop evolved into a de facto

arrest, at which point Miranda warnings were required. See id. at 5-6. I disagree. As discussed

above, once the Terry investigation ceased, and Thistlewood made clear to the defendant that he was

free to leave, the defendant chose instead to speak to ATF agents. During the roughly three hours the

defendant spent in the company of Hickey and Grasso, he was not handcuffed or otherwise restrained,

was reassured that he was not under arrest, and was permitted a degree of control over his

____________________________
and unconstrained choice.”) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).


                                                               27
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 28 of 33                          PageID #: 81



environment inconsistent with “custodial” interrogation: for example, Grasso and Hickey took the

defendant for a ride at his own suggestion and did not countermand his request that Thistlewood leave

Grasso’s car.

        Unquestionably, once Thistlewood placed the defendant under arrest and handcuffed him at

approximately 10 p.m., the defendant was “in custody” for Miranda purposes. Any statements

thereafter elicited from him via “interrogation” accordingly would be inadmissible in the absence of

Miranda warnings. Nonetheless, Thistlewood testified, in effect, that no conversation of consequence

ensued. En route to the jail, Thistlewood expressed an interest in talking to the defendant about the

case; however, the defendant replied that he would talk to him the following day. When Thistlewood

came to the jail the next day, the defendant refused to speak with him.

        Inasmuch as the government demonstrates that the defendant was not “in custody” during the

Terry investigation or the interview with ATF agents and was not “interrogated” by Thistlewood

following his 10 p.m. arrest, it meets its burden of showing compliance with the dictates of Miranda.

        I turn to the question whether the defendant’s statements nevertheless were made involuntarily.

Involuntary confessions violate the due-process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth amendments. See,

e.g., United States v. Genao, 281 F.3d 305, 310 (1st Cir. 2002). In the face of a defendant’s claim

that his confession was extracted involuntarily, the government bears the burden of showing, based on

the totality of the circumstances, that investigating agents neither “broke” nor overbore his will.

Chambers v. Florida, 309 U.S. 227, 239-40 (1940). As this language suggests, “coercive police

activity is a necessary predicate to the finding that a confession is not ‘voluntary[.]’” Colorado v.

Connelly, 479 U.S. 157, 167 (1986). See also, e.g., Rice v. Cooper, 148 F.3d 747, 750 (7th Cir.

1998) (in context of voluntariness of confession, “[t]he relevant constitutional principles are aimed not

at protecting people from themselves but at curbing abusive practices by public officers.”) (citation

                                                   28
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 29 of 33                                                       PageID #: 82



omitted).

          In this case, the defendant suggests that the police overbore his will, and extracted confessions

from him, by promises of leniency. See Dimott II Motion at 6. I am unpersuaded. The evidence

adduced at hearing suggests that the defendant made a calculated choice to speak with ATF agents –

and only ATF agents – in a bid to minimize the damage flowing from his encounter with officers at The

Hamlet. Up until the time of his arrest by Thistlewood, he continued to make calculated choices

regarding the amount of information he would divulge and the timing and manner in which he would

divulge it – for example, only to ATF agents, in a car away from The Hamlet, and in some instances

only “hypothetically.” Further, he continued to make statements despite having been told, upon inquiry

to Hickey and/or Grasso, that he was not under arrest and was free to leave.

          Beyond this, neither Hickey nor Grasso promised the defendant that he would evade arrest if

he confessed or showed them the location of the guns. Rather, the defendant queried whether, if he

took them to the firearms, he would not be arrested. In response, Hickey merely reiterated what he had

been saying to the defendant from the outset of their conversation: that ATF had no intention of

arresting him that evening unless something changed significantly. Moreover, Hickey had explained

early on to the defendant that ATF had no authority to “trump” the county and local agencies involved

in the Brewer-Dunning investigation. The defendant extracted no promise from local or county

authorities – with whom he had refused to deal – that they would not place him under arrest on state

charges.23 A unilateral hope of lenient treatment does not render a confession involuntary. See, e.g.,

United States v. Rowley, 975 F.2d 1357, 1361 (8th Cir. 1992) (“Although Rowley’s statements were


23
   While Thistlewood was told, upon arrival at the Hannaford parking lot, that the defendant would lead investigators to the stolen
firearms if he did not get arrested that night for receiving stolen property, there is no evidence that Thistlewood engaged in negotiations
with the defendant or otherwise relayed agreement to those terms.


                                                                   29
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 30 of 33                                                   PageID #: 83



given in the hope of leniency, they were not given with the promise of leniency, and thus were not

involuntary on that score.”).

          Nor, finally, did Hickey’s statement that he would relay the fact of any cooperation to the

United States Attorney’s Office constitute coercion sufficient to overbear the defendant’s will (even as

glossed with Hickey’s further observations that it looked fairly bad for the defendant and that relaying

his cooperation to the United States Attorney’s Office most likely would work in his favor). Hickey

did not promise that any particular benefit would materialize if the defendant confessed. In any event,

the First Circuit has expressed doubt that even a false promise that a suspect would not be prosecuted

undermines the voluntariness of a confession. See United States v. Byram, 145 F.3d 405, 408 (1st

Cir. 1998) (“[I]t would be very hard to treat as coercion a false assurance to a suspect that he was not

in danger of prosecution.”) (emphasis in original).

          For the foregoing reasons, the government meets its burden of demonstrating that statements

made to ATF agents on April 5, 2005 were voluntary.

                                             4. Validity of Search Warrant

          The defendant next argues that, stripped of evidence obtained illegally, the Hickey Affidavit

does not supply probable cause to search his vehicle or the Gorham storage unit. See Dimott II

Motion at 6. This claim hinges on the merit of the defendant’s prior assertions that evidence was in

fact garnered illegally. I have recommended that the court find otherwise. Should the court agree, that

is fatal to the defendant’s bid to suppress evidence seized pursuant to the warrant. 24

24
   The defendant does not assert that the Hickey Affidavit on its face failed to supply probable cause to search his vehicle or the
Gorham storage warrant. See Dimott II Motion at 6. Such a claim transparently would have no merit. The Hickey Affidavit
established a number of ties between the defendant’s truck and the Brewer-Dunning burglary, not least of which was the discovery of
the cans of mace and the antique Rolls razor. The Hickey Affidavit further conveyed a high probability that the stolen firearms likely
would be found in the storage unit based on the defendant’s own statements to that effect and confirmation from the owners of Trailers
Diversified that the unit the defendant had identified belonged to Riquinha, from whose cell phone the suspicious calls to the Brewer-
(continued on next page)

                                                                 30
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 31 of 33                           PageID #: 84



                                       5. Rule 41(f) Compliance

         Following the close of evidence at hearing, the defendant’s counsel asserted for the first time

that the warrant issued for search of the defendant’s vehicle and the Gorham storage unit was not

executed in compliance with Rule 41(f). That rule provides:

                (1) Noting the Time. The officer executing the warrant must enter on its face
         the exact date and time it is executed.

                (2) Inventory. An officer present during the execution of the warrant must
         prepare and verify an inventory of any property seized. The officer must do so in the
         presence of another officer and the person from whom, or from whose premises, the
         property was taken. If either one is not present, the officer must prepare and verify the
         inventory in the presence of at least one other credible person.

         With respect to Rule 41(f)(1), defense counsel initially argued that the return on the warrant

failed to indicate the date and time of its execution. However, I pointed out, and he conceded, that the

return in fact indicates that the warrant was executed on April 6, 2005 at 11:30 a.m. See Defendant’s

Exh. 2 at 3.

         With respect to Rule 41(f)(2), defense counsel noted that the return indicates that an inventory

of the contents of the storage unit was made in the presence of ATF supervising agent Brown but not in

the presence of the storage unit’s owners, Riquinha and his wife. See id. Hence, he reasoned,

pursuant to the plain language of the rule, an inventory should have been prepared and verified in the

presence of at least one other credible person. He noted that, while the inventory was verified to

Magistrate Judge Brownell, it was not prepared in his presence. Accordingly, he concluded, ATF did

not comply with Rule 41(f)(2) in executing the warrant.

         Counsel for the government, confronting this argument for the first time at hearing, countered

that either Brown or Magistrate Judge Brownell, in whose presence Hickey swore that the inventory

____________________________
Dunning residence had been placed.

                                                    31
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 32 of 33                         PageID #: 85



was a true and detailed account of the property taken by him pursuant to the warrant, see id., qualified

as “at least one other credible person” for purposes of Rule 41(f)(2).

       I need not resolve whether Brown or Magistrate Judge Brownell so qualifies. “Violations of

Rule 41(d) [predecessor to Rule 41(f)(2)] are essentially ministerial in nature[,] and a motion to

suppress should be granted only when the defendant demonstrates legal prejudice or that non-

compliance with the rule was intentional or in bad faith.” Marx, 635 F.2d at 441. Accord United

States v. Dauphinee, 538 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1976) (“Although we think that it would have been better

practice if the return had stated that the revolver was found and seized, we do not think that the

government agent’s failure to make an accurate return requires suppression of the evidence in this

case. The various procedural steps required by Rule 41(d) are basically ministerial. Appellant has

not demonstrated that he was prejudiced by the failure of the return to mention the revolver, and there

is no indication that the government was not acting in good faith. Under these circumstances the

district court did not err in denying the motion to suppress insofar as it was based on the wording of

the return.”) (citations and footnotes omitted); United States v. Hubbard, 493 F. Supp. 209, 221

(D.D.C. 1979), aff’d, 668 F.2d 1238 (D.C. Cir. 1981) (“[I]t is interesting to note that failure even to

complete an inventory is merely a ministerial violation which does not affect the validity of the

search.”). Even assuming arguendo that the warrant in this case was not executed in compliance with

Rule 41(f)(2), the defendant has made no showing of prejudice flowing therefrom or intentional or

bad-faith non-compliance. That is fatal to his bid for suppression on this ground.

                                           III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that both of the defendant’s motions to suppress be

DENIED.



                                                  32
Case 2:06-cr-00026-GZS Document 34 Filed 12/21/06 Page 33 of 33                        PageID #: 86



                                              NOTICE


        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum,
within ten (10) days after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum shall be
filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review by
the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 21st day of December, 2006

                                                      /s/ David M. Cohen
                                                      David M. Cohen
                                                      United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 33
