Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 1 of 13                     PageID #: 59



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                     )
                                             )
               v.                            )       CR-06-38-B-W
                                             )
PATRICK BOUTOT,                              )
                                             )
               Defendant.                    )


                                    SENTENCING ORDER

       A diagnosed schizophrenic, Patrick Boutot attempted to possess a firearm as a direct

result of his diminished mental capacity and is entitled to a downward departure under U.S.S.G.

§ 5K2.13. Further, as the Bureau of Prisons refused to pre-designate the facility where he will be

incarcerated or even, after sentencing, to consider the Court’s recommendations as to the

appropriate facility, the Court concludes that Mr. Boutot is entitled to a Koon departure, based on

extreme risks if incarcerated without regard for his need for psychiatric treatment. The Court

orders Mr. Boutot incarcerated for two weeks, a period sufficiently short to avoid his potential

designation within the general federal prison population and sufficiently long to impress upon

him the need to conform his future conduct with the law.

I. STATEMENT OF FACTS

       Patrick Boutot should not possess a firearm. Now thirty years old, he has carried a

diagnosis of schizophrenia since 1998. His underlying psychiatric condition is exacerbated by

polysubstance dependence, including abuse of marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol, which he uses to

self-medicate, occasionally with untoward consequences. Diagnosed as a Mentally Ill Chemical

Abuser (MICA), a category of patients particularly problematic for treatment personnel, Mr.

Boutot has been psychiatrically hospitalized on numerous occasions. He has been involuntarily
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 2 of 13                     PageID #: 60



hospitalized at least twice and is therefore prohibited from possessing a firearm under 18 U.S.C.

§ 922(g)(4).

       On January 13, 2006, Mr. Boutot appeared at a local pawnbroker and attempted to

purchase a handgun. He later said that he had been hearing voices and that unnamed people

were spreading rumors. He thought that if he had a handgun, the rumors would stop, and he

admitted he felt better when trying to buy the handgun. Mr. Boutot completed ATF Form 4473

and answered “No” to question 11.f, which asked whether he had previously been involuntarily

committed. When later interviewed, Mr. Boutot readily admitted that in answering “no,” he had

intended to deceive the pawnbroker into completing the sale. On May 10, 2006, a federal grand

jury indicted Mr. Boutot for making a false statement on a federal firearms application, a

violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6). Mr. Boutot has acknowledged from the outset that he

violated the law and has been willing to plead guilty.

       The Court and the parties have struggled with Mr. Boutot’s competence and how it

affects the proceedings, including whether he was sufficiently competent to stand trial and assist

in his defense and what the proper sentence should be. Mr. Boutot never contended that he was

unable to understand that his attempt to purchase the firearm was not only wrong, but also

violative of the law.    See 18 U.S.C. § 4242.       The Prosecution Version states that, when

interviewed after the offense, he readily “admitted that, by answering no to the question, he had

intended to deceive the gun dealer into completing the sale.” Prosecution Version at 2 (Docket

# 38). Further, during his allocution at sentencing, Mr. Boutot volunteered that part of his

motivation was to test the system and see if he could get a firearm.

       However, Mr. Boutot did question his competency to stand trial. See 18 U.S.C. § 4241.

On June 28, 2006, the Court granted Mr. Boutot’s motion for a competency examination and Mr.




                                                 2
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 3 of 13                                   PageID #: 61



Boutot underwent a thorough evaluation at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in New York

City. On August 11, 2006, the examiner concluded that he was competent to stand trial and on

September 11, 2006, the Court concurred. Based on Mr. Boutot’s continued willingness to plead

guilty, the matter was ready for a Rule 11 hearing and the entry of a guilty plea.

        This left the question of the appropriate sentence. The parties, with the Court’s approval,

agreed to have a Presentence Report (PSR) prepared prior to the entry of the guilty plea. The

Probation Office completed the PSR on February 6, 2007. It calculated that, with a total offense

level of 12 under the United States Sentencing Guidelines, and a criminal history category of I,

Mr. Boutot would face a guideline sentencing range of 10 to 16 months, falling within Zone C of

the guidelines. For a Zone C sentence, the guidelines would allow Mr. Boutot to serve half of

his sentence in community confinement or home detention, “provided that at least one-half of the

minimum term is satisfied by imprisonment.” U.S.S.G. § 5C1.1(d).

II. DISCUSSION

        Mr. Boutot seeks a downward departure under either the aberrant behavior provision,

U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20, or the diminished capacity provision, U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13.

        A. Aberrant Behavior – U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20

        Under U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20, a court may grant a downward departure for aberrant behavior

if a number of conditions are met. U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20. First, the defendant cannot have been

convicted of certain enumerated offenses, not applicable here.1 Second, a court is allowed to

depart downward only if the defendant committed a single criminal occurrence or single criminal

transaction that (1) was committed without significant planning; (2) was of limited duration; and,

(3) represents a marked deviation from an otherwise law-abiding life. Id. Finally, the court may


1
  The offenses include those involving a minor victim, sex trafficking in children, obscenity, sexual abuse, sexual
exploitation of children, or transportation for illegal sexual activity. See U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20(a).


                                                        3
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 4 of 13                                    PageID #: 62



not depart downward under this section if the offense involved serious bodily injury or death, the

defendant discharged a firearm or otherwise used a firearm or a dangerous weapon, the

conviction was for a serious drug offense, or the defendant had more than one criminal history

point or any other serious criminal behavior. Id.

        The aberrant behavior provision does not quite fit. Mr. Boutot meets most, but not all the

aberrant behavior criteria. United States v. Rivera-Rodriguez, 318 F.3d 268, 275 (1st Cir. 2003)

(“[T]he defendant must meet all of the express qualifications in application note 1 . . . and not be

excluded by any of the express exclusions in the guideline itself . . .”).2 Mr. Boutot’s offense is

not one where the downward departure is unavailable under one of the categorical exclusions in

U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20(c)(1)-(3). He does not have more than one criminal history point or a prior

federal or state felony conviction. U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20(c)(4). The offense was committed without

significant planning and was of limited duration. U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20(b)(1)-(2).

        The problem is that the offense does not represent a “marked deviation by the defendant

from an otherwise law-abiding life.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20(b)(3). Consistent with his MICA

diagnosis, Mr. Boutot frankly admitted extensive and prolonged use of illegal drugs, including

heroin, cocaine, LSD, mushrooms, oxycodone, and marijuana, and the Court cannot conclude

that a person who has routinely violated federal and state drug laws is leading an “otherwise law

abiding life.” Because the Court cannot conclude that the instant offense represents a marked

deviation by Mr. Boutot from an otherwise law-abiding life, he is not entitled to an aberrant

behavior departure under U.S.S.G. § 5K2.20.




2
  Until 2002, the first application note under U.S.S.G. §5K2.20 simply contained the three definitional requirements
for aberrant behavior. The 2003 version of the guidelines reflects the current amended version, in which the
requirements are outlined in § 5K2.20(b). The version of the guidelines the sentencing court applied in Rivera-
Rodriguez contained the three requirements in the first application note.


                                                         4
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 5 of 13                                  PageID #: 63



         B. Diminished Capacity – U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13

         The diminished capacity downward departure is a different story.                      It allows for a

downward departure if the defendant “committed the offense while suffering from a significantly

reduced mental capacity” and the “significantly reduced mental capacity contributed

substantially to the commission of the offense.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13. 3 The Court does not

hesitate in finding that Mr. Boutot was suffering from a significantly reduced mental capacity at

the time he committed the instant offense. He attempted to purchase the firearm because he was

hearing voices, the voices were telling him about rumors, and he thought that if he got a gun, the

rumors would stop. He actually felt better when he was in the process of purchasing the firearm.

Delusions and hallucinations are symptoms consistent with his diagnosis of schizophrenia and at

the time of the offense, Mr. Boutot was not only suffering from these symptoms, but these

symptoms contributed substantially to his commission of the offense.                     See United States v.

Ruklick, 919 F.2d 95, 98 (8th Cir. 1990) (applying U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13 to a defendant with

schizophrenia when his diminished capacity “comprised a contributing factor in the commission

of the offense.”); United States v. Lauzon, 938 F.2d 326, 330-31 (1st Cir. 1991) (quoting Ruklick

with approval and applying § 5K2.13 to a defendant who was borderline mentally retarded).4




3
  The application note to § 5K2.13 defines “significantly reduced mental capacity” to mean that “the defendant,
although convicted, has a significantly impaired ability to (A) understand the wrongfulness of the behavior
comprising the offense or to exercise the power of reason; or (B) control behavior that the defendant knows is
wrongful.”
4
  The First Circuit expanded on its holding:

                  We agree that § 5K2.13 does not require that reduced mental capacity be the
                  “but-for” or “sole” cause of the offense. The key words of the section are: “a
                  lower sentence may be warranted to reflect the extent to which reduced mental
                  capacity contributed to the commission of the offense. . . .” This means, as we
                  interpret it, that the reduced mental capacity of a defendant must have
                  contributed to some extent to the commission of the offense.

United States v. Lauzon, 938 F.2d 326, 331 (1st Cir. 1991) (emphasis in original).


                                                         5
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 6 of 13                                     PageID #: 64



         There are, however, restrictions on the availability of a diminished capacity downward

departure. The provision is unavailable to defendants whose reduced mental capacity was

caused by the “voluntary use of drugs or other intoxicants.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13. Here, because

of Mr. Boutot’s history and diagnosis, the Court has carefully reviewed his counseling notes

surrounding the day he committed this crime. They reveal that he had not been using illegal

drugs or alcohol for approximately two months. The January 3, 2006 note states: “Said he has

not used illicit drugs or alcohol in 2 months” and the January 10, 2006 note reads: “[H]e states

he . . . has not used illicit drugs in 65 days. Adds ‘I’ve been enjoying sobriety so much.’”

Neither these records nor other evidence establishes that Mr. Boutot’s use of illegal drugs or

alcohol caused or contributed to the commission of this offense.

         With the possible exception for the need to protect the public, none of the other

restrictions under the guideline applies.5 The guideline prohibits a downward departure if “the

facts and circumstances of the . . . offense indicate a need to protect the public because the

offense involved actual violence or a serious threat of violence.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13. There is

no evidence of “actual violence” in this case and, therefore, the narrow question is whether Mr.

Boutot’s attempted purchase represented a “serious threat of violence” so as to disqualify him

from the diminished capacity downward departure.

         This is a difficult question. In enacting the Gun Control Act, Congress “sought broadly

to keep firearms away from the persons Congress classified as potentially irresponsible and

dangerous.” Barrett v. United States, 423 U.S. 212, 218 (1976). This prohibition included

individuals “not legally entitled to possess [firearms] because of . . . incompetency.” Id. at 220

(quoting S. Rep. No. 1501, 90th Cong., 2d Sess., 22 (1968)). Mr. Boutot’s conviction is

5
 The guideline prohibits a diminished capacity downward departure if “the defendant’s criminal history indicates a
need to incarcerate the defendant to protect the public.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13. It also bars application if the defendant
has committed one of a series of listed crimes. Mr. Boutot does not have any prior convictions.


                                                          6
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 7 of 13                                    PageID #: 65



consistent with this underlying policy, but there is no suggestion that, because of his prior

involuntary commitment to a mental institution, he is – for that reason alone – disqualified from

a § 5K2.13 departure. There are certainly instances where a person previously committed to a

mental institution has such a proclivity for violence that he would be prohibited from receiving a

§ 5K2.13 downward departure, but the application of the departure is case-specific. See United

States v. Cantu, 12 F.3d 1506, 1513 (9th Cir. 1993) (concluding that a § 5K2.13 downward

departure could be available to a defendant who was “anxious, depressed, full of rage, markedly

paranoid, and explosive at times.”) (internal quotation marks omitted). 6

        Due to his psychiatric condition, Mr. Boutot may have some potential for violence, but

despite his extensive hospitalizations and ongoing counseling, there is only a single documented

instance of violent behavior. In 2001, he was charged with assaulting his mother with whom he

has had a complicated relationship, but he was not convicted. At age thirty, despite his long-

term mental illness, he has no convictions and no other charges. After reviewing his psychiatric

history and considering the nature of the offense, the Court concludes that Mr. Boutot is entitled

to a downward departure for diminished capacity under U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13.

        C. Koon v. United States Departure: Extraordinary Vulnerability in Prison

        In Koon v. United States, the United States Supreme Court concluded that the district

court did not abuse its discretion when, in fashioning its sentence, it considered “the

extraordinary notoriety and national media coverage of this case, coupled with the defendants’

status as police officers, [which] make Koon and Powell unusually susceptible to prison abuse.”

6
  This conclusion is bolstered by the guideline provisions on the definition of crime of violence. Under the
guidelines, the possession or attempted possession of a handgun by a felon does not necessarily constitute a crime of
violence. See U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2, App. Note 1 (“‘Crime of violence’ does not include the offense of unlawful
possession of a firearm by a felon unless the possession was of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).”). Even
though the guidelines do not directly address whether the possession – or attempted possession – of a firearm by one
previously involuntarily committed to a mental institution constitutes a crime of violence, if possession by a felon
does not, it follows that possession by a person previously committed to a mental institution does not necessarily
constitute a crime of violence either.


                                                         7
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 8 of 13                                    PageID #: 66



518 U.S. 81, 112 (1996). In United States v. Ribot, Judge Gertner suggested that Koon may

justify a departure in a case involving a defendant with psychiatric problems who presented

“extraordinary vulnerability to abuse in prison.” 97 F. Supp. 2d 74, 84 (D. Mass. 1999);7 see

also United States v. Pineyro, 372 F. Supp. 2d 133 (D. Mass. 2005).8

        From the outset, the Government, defense counsel, and the Court have been concerned

about the impact that serving a prison term with the general inmate population would have on

Mr. Boutot.       Mr. Boutot is barely able to cope with life when he takes his prescribed

medications, receives supportive counseling, and stays away from illegal drugs and alcohol.

Even then, as this case demonstrates, he occasionally decompensates. Here, despite all of these

reinforcing factors, Mr. Boutot began to believe that people were accusing him of raping a girl,

that these people were persistently spreading these rumors about him, and that if he got a gun,

the rumors would stop and he would feel better. In the past, when not adequately monitored, Mr.

Boutot has become severely delusional, believing he was working for the CIA, shaving his entire

body because he thought he was an Olympic swimmer, believing he exuded a powerful,

disagreeable odor, and having what he described as “a spiritual experience” when he saw FBI

agents in the desert, who were really angels.

        The challenge Mr. Boutot’s case presents is striking the appropriate balance between the

need to punish the crime and the need not to exact a punishment different in kind and harshness

due to his psychiatric condition. If the Bureau of Prisons (BOP) designated Mr. Boutot to serve

a sentence with the general inmate population, the Court and the parties are deeply concerned


7
   Taking into account all grounds for departure, Judge Gertner departed seven offense levels downward – from 17
to 10. Ribot, 97 F. Supp. 2d at 84.
8
  In Pineyro, Judge Gertner concluded: “A sentence within the Guidelines range – indeed any sentence of
imprisonment beyond what Pineyro has already received – would substantially disrupt an existing, elaborate and
required medical treatment plan for Pineyro’s [heterotopic ossification], wholly without justification.” 372 F. Supp.
2d at 139-40. The Court departed nine levels, and the defendant satisfied his sentence with fifteen months of time
served. Id. at 140.


                                                         8
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 9 of 13                                    PageID #: 67



that he would fare poorly, would fail to take required medications, would begin to hallucinate or

otherwise decompensate, and would suffer through his term of incarceration far more than an

inmate without his psychiatric history. On the other hand, if the BOP designated Mr. Boutot to

an institution that would attend to his psychiatric needs, there is evidence that he could withstand

incarceration. 9

        To make certain that, if Mr. Boutot were incarcerated, the BOP would designate him to a

facility appropriate for his psychiatric condition, the Government, upon the Court’s urging and

with the Defendant’s consent, explored with the BOP whether it could give any assurance that

Mr. Boutot would be placed in a medical facility or other institution that would monitor his

psychiatric condition and maintain treatment. On February 26, 2007, the Government reported

discouraging news. Dr. Shelly Stanton, the Acting Director of the BOP Psychiatric Services,

frankly stated that the BOP would not provide a pre-sentencing designation, and would not

guarantee that he would be designated to a medical facility. She warned that he might be

designated to a “traditional penitentiary setting.” The Assistant United States Attorney (AUSA)

reported that if the Court wished to have Mr. Boutot serve any portion of his sentence in a

medical facility, it must “make a recommendation in the Judgment and Commitment that he

receive mental health treatment at the appropriate BOP facility.” But even if the Court made

such a recommendation, the AUSA wrote: “When asked, Dr. Stanton reported that the Court’s

recommendation that the defendant serve his time at a particular BOP facility, such as Devens, is

not given any consideration.” (emphasis added).10


9
   For example, Mr. Boutot’s prolonged stay at the psychiatric wing of the Metropolitan Correctional Center was
uneventful. He kept mostly to himself, took his medication, and was generally cooperative.
10
    Dr. Stanton’s statement comes as a surprise. The Court acknowledges the BOP’s statutory authority to designate
the place of confinement for federal prisoners. United States v. Guerrette, 389 F. Supp. 2d 10, 12 (D. Me. 2005); 18
U.S.C. § 3621(b). In doing so, the BOP must factor into its designation decision a host of factors unavailable to the
courts. Nevertheless, the statute also directs that, in making the designation, the BOP should consider “any
statement by the court that imposed the sentence . . . recommending a type of penal or correctional facility as


                                                         9
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 10 of 13                                    PageID #: 68



        Furthermore, the AUSA reported that the BOP designation will not take place until six to

eight weeks after the imposition of sentence. If remanded immediately after sentencing, Mr.

Boutot would likely be incarcerated at a combination of state facilities, where he might or might

not receive his prescribed medication and required treatment plan. 11 To allow him to remain on

bail during this six to eight week period would be one option, but the impact of a looming federal

prison term on Mr. Boutot during this interval would be a separate cause for concern.

        The combination of Mr. Boutot’s significant underlying schizophrenia, a diagnosis

confirmed by the BOP psychologists, and the BOP’s unwillingness to pre-designate or even give

“any consideration” to the Court’s recommendation as to designation leads to the conclusion that

Mr. Boutot presents extraordinary grounds for a Koon departure, based on the substantial risk of

his extreme vulnerability in prison.

        D. Extent of the Departure

                 1. Section 5K2.13

        Under § 5K2.13, the extent of the downward departure “should reflect the extent to which

the reduced mental capacity contributed to the commission of the offense.” U.S.S.G. § 5K2.13.

Here, Mr. Boutot committed this offense because of his diminished capacity, but it is also his

diminished capacity that renders his attempted purchase of a firearm an offense in the first place.


appropriate . . . .” 18 U.S.C. § 3621(b)(4)(B). Consistent with this provision, sentencing courts will occasionally
“make recommendations regarding the type of facility or a specific facility.” United States v. Cintron-Fernandez,
356 F.3d 340, 345 (1st Cir. 2004). It is clear that a court’s recommendations “remain recommendations only,”
Guerrette, 389 F. Supp. 2d at 12, and the BOP is free to do what it deems best. It may be that Dr. Stanton’s
statement draws a distinction between court recommendations about the “type of facility,” which the BOP will
consider, and a “specific facility,” which it wi ll not. The language in Cintron-Fernandez, however, suggests that in
the First Circuit, the statute encompasses both. That BOP would not give the sentencing court’s recommendation
“any consideration,” therefore, seems inconsistent with the law in this Circuit. Her statement may not represent
official BOP policy, but her candor may reflect actual BOP practice.
11
   What happens to a defendant upon the imposition of sentence, if remanded immediately, remains complicated and
uncertain. In this Court, the defendant is usually held locally for a brief period and then transferred to Cumberland
County Jail in Portland to await designation. Apparently, some local facilities are better than others in making
certain that the defendant receives prescribed medication; upon transfer, it may take some time for the defendant’s
medication regime to catch up to the defendant.


                                                        10
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 11 of 13                                    PageID #: 69



In view of the interrelationship between his offense and his mental capacity, the Court concludes

that his offense level should be reduced four levels from Offense Level 12 to Offense Level 8,

placing Mr. Boutot in Zone A.

                 2. Koon Departure

        The Court arrives at the same result for the Koon departure. A four level reduction will

allow the exercise of discretion as to where Mr. Boutot serves his incarceration. There is

commonly a delay as long as six to eight weeks before the BOP designation and, during this

time, Mr. Boutot will be held in state of Maine facilities. Although the Court has no authority to

require that Mr. Boutot be held in a particular facility, the parties have suggested that, if Mr.

Boutot were incarcerated for not more than two weeks, they would be able to place him in a

particular local facility where he would be more likely to have access to his prescribed

medications and the chances of a serious psychiatric setback would be diminished. 12 To achieve

the departure consistent with the basis for the departure, the Court departs downward four levels

from Offense Level 12 to Offense Level 8, again, placing Mr. Boutot in Zone A.

                 3. A Balance of Unsatisfactory Alternates

        The Court’s consternation about Mr. Boutot’s attempted possession of a firearm is not

fully assuaged. Because the prohibition of the law applied to him precisely because he had been

involuntarily committed for a psychiatric illness, it follows that his psychiatric illness cannot

grant him immunity from punishment. Further, Mr. Boutot must be effectively dissuaded from

attempting to repeat the conduct that led to his commission of this offense.

        The alternatives are unsatisfactory. Placing him on probation alone would, in the Court’s

view, be an insufficient penalty to adequately deter Mr. Boutot from similar conduct in the


12
  Commonly, if a defendant is ordered to serve a brief period of incarceration, the time is served locally simply to
avoid the expense of transfer to a federal prison.


                                                        11
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 12 of 13                       PageID #: 70



future. Placing Mr. Boutot, who struggles with paranoia, on electronic monitoring for an

extended period would raise concerns about the impact extended use of an electronic bracelet

would have on his underlying schizophrenia.           Designating Mr. Boutot to Pharos House, a

residential rehabilitation center in Portland would be one alternative, but the Court has no

authority to do so.

       The last option is imprisonment. As the Court has determined that he is extraordinarily

vulnerable to imprisonment, it may seem inconsistent to imprison Mr. Boutot for any period of

incarceration. But, Mr. Boutot must receive some punishment for his conduct, if only to impress

upon him the absolute necessity of not repeating it. Further, incarceration itself is not necessarily

inappropriate for Mr. Boutot; what is inappropriate is incarceration at an institution that does not

recognize and accommodate his underlying psychiatric condition.

III. CONCLUSION

       This case points out the limited range of options, due in large part to the BOP’s inability

to pre-designate a prison facility, and more significantly, its refusal to give any consideration to

the Court’s recommendations about designation.           If the BOP designated Mr. Boutot to a

“traditional penitentiary setting” without vigilant monitoring of his psychiatric condition, without

intense oversight to assure his regular ingestion of critical psychotropic medication, and without

ongoing counseling, the Court concludes that Mr. Boutot would be sentenced to a far more

severe term of incarceration than a similarly situated defendant and a far more severe penalty

than his crime justifies. Therefore, the Court orders the Defendant to serve a prison sentence of

two weeks, a period of incarceration long enough to impress upon Mr. Boutot the need to




                                                 12
Case 1:06-cr-00038-JAW Document 44 Filed 03/29/07 Page 13 of 13                                      PageID #: 71



conform his future conduct to the requirements of the law and short enough to avoid his custody

within the general inmate population of the BOP system. 13

         SO ORDERED.


                                                                /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                                                JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                                                UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


Dated this 29th day of March, 2007




13
   Technically, the term of incarceration is 64 days, since Mr. Boutot is entitled to credit for time served during his
court-ordered psychiatric evaluation; in this case, fifty days. In addition to incarceration, the Court is imposing a
three year term of supervised release, is mandating continuing mental health treatment, drug and alcohol counseling,
and periodic drug and alcohol testing, is imposing a $2,000 fine, and the mandatory $100 special assessment.


                                                         13
