Case 2:03-cr-00063-GZS Document 139 Filed 02/20/07 Page 1 of 3                        PageID #: 541



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                               )
                                                       )
v.                                                     )       Crim. No. 03-63-P-C
                                                       )
ALICIA ELIZABETH GOUZIE,                               )
                                                       )
                       Supervised Releasee             )


                                              ORDER

       This matter came before me on February 16, 2007 for a preliminary hearing pursuant to Fed. R.

Crim. P. 32.1(a)(1). The supervised releasee appeared with counsel, waived her right to a

preliminary hearing and consented to the entry of a finding of probable cause to hold her for a

revocation hearing. Accordingly, I FIND probable cause to hold the supervised releasee for a

revocation hearing.

       A release hearing was held at Gouzie’s request for the purpose of determining whether she is

eligible for release pending the revocation hearing. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1(a)(6). The standards

governing release in these circumstances are those prescribed in 18 U.S.C. § 3143(a). Id. Thus,

Gouzie is entitled to be released if she establishes, by clear and convincing evidence, that she is not

likely to flee or pose a danger to the safety of any other person or the community if released pursuant

to 18 U.S.C. § 3142(b) or (c).

       Gouzie was placed on supervised release on February 24, 2006 following her release from a

term of imprisonment imposed in April 2004 upon her conviction in this court for conspiracy to

possess stolen firearms. The evidence is strong that Gouzie has a long-standing, serious, and


                                                  1
Case 2:03-cr-00063-GZS Document 139 Filed 02/20/07 Page 2 of 3                         PageID #: 542



continuing drug habit. Specifically, since her release from prison she has, on several occasions, tested

positive for, and in many instances admitted to the use of, cocaine, opiates and/or marijuana. Indeed,

in October 2006 she was terminated from a job for attempting to obtain drugs from fellow employees.

Moreover, on a number of occasions she failed to report, as required, for drug testing. I infer from

those failures, viewed in the full context of her illegal drug use during the period of her supervised

release, that the reason she failed to appear was because she knew she would test positive for

controlled substances. Gouzie has not shown that she has financial resources derived from legitimate

sources of income with which to obtain these controlled substances, and none is apparent from the

record. At the least, her unlawful use of controlled substances helps to maintain a market that fosters a

continuation of illegal drug supply and use which remain a scourge on the community.

        The government also contends that Gouzie poses a risk of flight. I need not decide whether she

has met her burden regarding risk of flight inasmuch as, on this record, and given the nature of the

offending conduct underlying the petition for revocation, I can only conclude that Gouzie has failed to

establish by clear and convincing evidence that she is not likely to pose a danger to the safety of the

community if released pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3142(b) or (c).

        The supervised releasee is committed to the custody of the Attorney General or his designated

representative for confinement in a corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody pending appeal. The supervised

releasee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity for private consultation with her counsel. On

order of a court of the United States or on request of an attorney for the government, the person in

charge of the corrections facility shall deliver the supervised releasee to the United States Marshal for

the purposes of an appearance in connection with a court proceeding.

        Dated this 20th day of February, 2007.

                                                   2
Case 2:03-cr-00063-GZS Document 139 Filed 02/20/07 Page 3 of 3       PageID #: 543



                                         /s/ David M. Cohen
                                         David M. Cohen
                                         United States Magistrate Judge




                                     3
