Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 1 of 14                     PageID #: 70



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                            )
                                                     )
v.                                                   ) Crim. No. 4-44-B-W
                                                     )
DAREN J. CLARK,                                      )
                                                     )
                      Defendant                      )


                                    Recommended Decision

       Daren J. Clark, a Connecticut resident and convicted felon, is charged in an indictment

with possession of a firearm by a felon in connection with a night hunting incident in Maine in

November 2003. Clark allegedly possessed a .22 caliber Marlin rifle, identified by its serial

number, during the night hunting incident. In January 2004 Connecticut officers executed a

search warrant at Clark's residence in East Hartford based in large part upon the probable cause

developed in connection with the Maine investigation. While failing to locate the .22 caliber

rifle, other firearms were found, forming the basis of state charges in Connecticut for which

Clark was arrested at the time of the search. Additionally, Clark made certain incriminating

statements both to a Maine investigator present at the scene and, separately, to two Connecticut

law enforcement officers. Clark has moved to suppress those statements as obtained in violation

of the Miranda rule. An evidentiary hearing was held before me on May 7, 2007. I now

recommend the court adopt these proposed findings of fact and deny, in part, the motion to

suppress, but grant the motion to the extent it seeks suppression of certain unwarned statements

made by Clark while seated at his kitchen table.
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 2 of 14                    PageID #: 71



                                  Proposed Findings of Fact

       Philip Dugas is a Warden Investigator for the Maine Warden Service. In that capacity he

became aware of the fact that in November 2003 Warden Mark Merrifield conducted an

undercover investigation into fish and wildlife violations in Ashland, Maine. The primary target

of the investigation was Eric Argraves. During the investigation, Warden Merrifield developed

probable cause to believe that Daren Clark, a felon and one of Argraves's acquaintances, had

possessed a firearm during night hunting incidents on November 3 and 4, 2003. In January

2004, relying upon information Warden Merrifield gathered during his undercover investigation,

the Maine Warden Service executed a number of search warrants, including at Argraves’s

residence. Because Clark lived in Connecticut, Maine officials asked for the assistance of the

Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and Connecticut State Police. Dugas was

assigned to assist the Connecticut authorities who decided to use the probable cause developed in

Maine to seek a search warrant for Clark's residence.

       On January 14, 2004, Dugas accompanied a search team to the mobile home of Daren

Clark in East Hartford, Connecticut. After officers of the Connecticut State Police Firearms

Task Force had made entry and secured the firearms, Dugas entered the residence with their

permission. He knew that the .22 caliber Marlin rifle had not been discovered in the residence.

When he entered the mobile home Daren Clark was seated at the kitchen table chatting casually

with Sgt. Darren Edwards of the Connecticut State Police. Clark was smoking a cigarette.

Dugas sat down at the table, identified himself and showed Clark his credentials from Maine.

Dugas informed Clark he did not have jurisdiction to arrest him in Connecticut, but he wanted to

talk with him about the Maine incident and the .22 caliber Marlin rifle. Dugas also advised him

that he had four summonses from the State of Maine for Clark, but he was under no obligation to




                                                2
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 3 of 14                        PageID #: 72



accept service of those summonses. Dugas did not advise Clark of his Miranda rights. Clark

was cooperative and indicated he was willing to talk with the officer and accept service of the

Maine summonses. He asked a number of questions about how he needed to respond to the

summonses and whom he needed to contact. Dugas did not threaten or physically restrain Mr.

Clark, pull his weapon or make a show of force. Clark was completely cooperative throughout.

       Dugas asked Clark about the .22 magnum rifle. Clark admitted he went night hunting

with Argraves and the undercover officer on November 3 and acknowledged he used the rifle to

shoot a deer in the head that night. Clark denied deer hunting on the following night, although

he admitted to riding in the vehicle with the other two. After interviewing Clark, Dugas left the

mobile home. Local officers then formally arrested Mr. Clark on Connecticut charges.

       Darren Edwards is a recently retired Connecticut State Police sergeant with twenty-four

years experience. He was the departmental expert on firearms laws for 10 years and served as a

Supervisor for the last eight years of his tenure. For the last four years prior to retirement, he

was Commanding Officer of Firearms Task Force. During that time, he participated in

approximately 50 firearms-related search warrants.

       On January 14, 2004, Edwards was the supervisor of a seven-person team that executed

the search warrant at the home of Daren Clark in East Hartford, CT. The Maine Warden’s

Service had asked the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) for assistance

with an investigation because they had probable cause to believe that Clark possessed firearms

despite his felony status. DEP in turn asked the Connecticut State Police Firearms Task Force

for assistance because firearms were to be seized if they obtained a search warrant. The final

search team included two Conservation Officers from DEP, one Maine Warden, and four officers

from the Firearms Task Force.




                                                  3
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 4 of 14                                        PageID #: 73



         Because of the risk to officer safety associated with the presence of firearms, the Task

Force officers making the initial entry secured all persons in the residence before proceeding.

Frequently, all persons are handcuffed until the firearms have been located. Six Task Force

agents made entry into Clark’s residence and found Clark and members of his family inside.

Immediately upon entering, Edwards asked Clark where the firearms were located. Clark said

they were in a case in the hallway. Because he and the others in the residence were cooperative

from the outset, and because the officers found all the firearms where he said they would be,

neither he nor any other person was handcuffed, although all of them were restrained in the sense

that they were frisked, told where to sit and were prevented from moving around within the

house. Aside from the initial rapid entry1, the officers made no other show of force. They did

not threaten Clark, coerce him or physically restrain him.

         After the firearms were recovered from the hallway case, Clark said that some of

the firearms belonged to another person in his family, not him. Edwards then asked him which

guns were his and which belonged to someone else, which Clark explained to Edwards. Aside

from asking Clark where the firearms were located when first entering the residence, and asking

him which firearms were his after he said some belonged to another person, Edwards did not ask

Clark any other investigative questions. Clark was cooperative throughout the search of his

residence. After recovering and securing the firearms from the hall cabinet, Edwards noticed

that one was similar to a gun he had recently purchased. Clark and Edwards discussed that

particular type of firearm casually and also discussed hunting. Clark had a Maine Big Buck Club

plaque on his wall indicating that he had shot a buck weighing more than 200 pounds. That fact

1
         The police report describes it as an "initial rapid entry." At the hearing the Connecticut officers testified
they knocked and were admitted by one of the residents and there was nothing untoward about the entry. I do not
think those two statements are inconsistent and the manner of entry is not an issue in any event. A search team
involving six officers in search of firearms would enter a residence rapidly and with a clear focus. A reasonable
person would view the entry as a show of force.


                                                           4
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 5 of 14                     PageID #: 74



was also discussed. Edwards did not ask Clark any questions about the Maine case or the .22

caliber Marlin.

       As Edwards and Clark were sitting at the kitchen table having this casual discussion,

Maine Warden Philip Dugas, who had been waiting outside, entered the residence and

interviewed Clark. When Warden Dugas began his interview, Edwards stood within earshot. In

Edwards's view Clark was continuing to be cooperative throughout the interview. After Warden

Dugas was done interviewing Clark, the Connecticut officers arrested Clark on Connecticut

charges of criminal possession of a firearm because he was a felon at the time of the search and

had guns in his possession. He was transported by members of the Firearms Task Force to the

State Police barracks, where Trooper David Hickey advised him of his Miranda rights, obtained

a written waiver and interviewed him.

       David Hickey has been employed by the Connecticut State Police since January 1998. In

June 2002 he was assigned to the Statewide Firearms Trafficking Task Force, where he has

worked ever since. During his service with the Firearms Task Force, he participated in dozens of

firearms search warrants. On January 13, 2004, Hickey received a call from Sgt. Enright of the

Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, Law Enforcement Division. He informed

Hickey that the Maine Warden’s Service had asked for Connecticut’s assistance in searching the

East Hartford home of Daren Clark for firearms because an undercover investigation in Maine

revealed that Clark, a felon, possessed firearms and used them to hunt illegally. Because Hickey

was assigned to the Firearms Task Force, Sgt. Enright asked him for assistance with the

investigation and search warrant.

       After receiving Sgt. Enright’s call and talking to Maine Warden Philip Dugas, Hickey

confirmed that Daren Clark lived at 42 Arapaho Drive in East Hartford, that he had been




                                                5
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 6 of 14                     PageID #: 75



convicted in Hartford Superior Court of felony possession of narcotics in 1989, that he had

obtained a Connecticut hunting license in 2003, and that he had bagged a deer on November 27,

2003, indicating when he tagged the deer that he had used a rifle to kill it. On January 14, 2004,

Hickey swore out an affidavit and obtained a Connecticut state search warrant for Clark’s

residence. He then participated in the execution of the warrant.

       Upon entering the residence, Hickey found six people inside, including Clark, his wife,

an adult male named Douglas Boyer, and three children. The adults were all frisked for officer

safety. Clark’s wife was allowed to leave with the three children shortly thereafter. Before she

left the residence she had produced the keys to the gun cabinet. Clark and Boyer remained.

During the search, Clark was completely cooperative and informed the officers where the

firearms were stored. The officers located three firearms in a locked case in the hallway, where

he said they would be. After Clark indicated that one of the guns belonged to Boyer, and Boyer

provided proof of ownership, they left Boyer’s firearm with him and seized the other two.

Hickey participated in a general conversation with Clark and Boyer about the ownership interests

of the three guns.

       Hickey did not participate in Dugas's interview of Clark at the kitchen table nor did he

engage in the "casual chat" with Edwards and Clark. After Dugas left the residence, Hickey

formally arrested Clark on Connecticut state firearms charges and transported him to Troop H.

After they arrived at the barracks, Hickey advised Clark of his Miranda warnings. Clark signed a

written acknowledgment of rights and waiver. After Clark waived his Miranda rights, he gave a

voluntary statement. Hickey committed that statement to writing and Clark signed it, initialing

certain changes to the document. The only statements that Clark gave to Hickey about the .22

Marlin rifle are contained in the written statement. Hickey supplied the serial number of that




                                                6
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 7 of 14                      PageID #: 76



weapon to Clark based upon Hickey's review of the Maine investigative reports. Clark's

statement indicated the .22 Marlin was purchased for his eight year old daughter to use when she

becomes old enough. Clark told Hickey the rifle is kept in Maine at the Argraves's residence and

has never been in Connecticut.

                                            Discussion

       There are four discrete sets of statements that must be analyzed in this case: (1) the

comments made to Edwards and Hickey regarding the location and ownership of the guns; (2)

the "casual chat" with Edwards at the kitchen table; (3) the investigative interview conducted by

Dugas in the kitchen; and (4) the post-Miranda statement to Hickey in the booking room. Clark

maintains the first three sets of statements were obtained in violation of Miranda and the fourth

statement should be suppressed because it is tainted by the earlier statements. Because Clark

was not administered a prophylactic Miranda warning during the search of his premises, his

motion to suppress will succeed to the extent that he was subjected to custodial interrogation. In

other words, Clark must have been "in custody" when he made the statements he would have the

court suppress and the statements must be the product of interrogation or its "functional

equivalent." United States v. Lopez, 380 F.3d 538, 545 (1st Cir. 2004). For purposes of the

Fifth Amendment, "in custody" means that the defendant has been formally arrested or has had

his freedom of movement restrained to the degree associated with a formal arrest. United States

v. Ventura, 85 F.3d 708, 710 (1st Cir. 1996). Whether the restraint on movement is sufficient to

rise to the level of an arrest depends on the objective circumstances and how they would be

perceived by a reasonable person standing in the shoes of the suspect. Id. at 711. "Relevant

circumstances include whether the suspect was questioned in familiar or at least neutral

surroundings, the number of law enforcement officers present at the scene, the degree of physical




                                                 7
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 8 of 14                       PageID #: 77



restraint placed upon the suspect, and the duration and character of the interrogation." Id.

(quotation marks and citation omitted). As for the "functional equivalent" of interrogation, the

standard is whether "any words or actions on the part of the police [were] reasonably likely to

elicit an incriminating response from the suspect." Id. (quoting Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S.

291, 301 (1980)).

1.     The initial statements regarding location and ownership of the guns

       Upon initial entry into the home all of the occupants were frisked and asked to have seats.

Clark, his wife, and Boyer all cooperated with the officers and told them where the guns were

and assisted in obtaining a key to the cabinet. While all six occupants remained in the apartment

I think it is questionable whether the mere execution of the search warrant created a custodial

setting, although there were certainly custodial aspects to it. Nor do I think Boyer's chatter about

his ownership of the one gun and the officer's attempts to follow up on that claim, which

ultimately resulted in the release of the gun to him, was the functional equivalent of interrogating

Clark. During that initial period when the officers were locating, securing, and identifying the

weapons in the home, it does not appear to me that a custodial interrogation occurred even

though the officers were executing a search warrant on the premises and even though Clark

joined with Boyer and his wife in responding to inquiries. Cf. U.S. v. McCarty, 475 F.3d 39, 44-

46 (1st Cir. 2007) (finding that no arrest occurred post search warrant execution and therefore the

responses to interrogation post-search were not obtained in violation of Miranda).

       However, even if the situation is viewed as custodial and the questions asked are viewed

as interrogation, there is a public safety exception to Miranda articulated in New York v.

Quarles, 467 U.S. 649, 655-59 (1984). This exception allows police to question an arrestee

without first giving Miranda warnings if the police reasonably believe doing so will protect them




                                                 8
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 9 of 14                       PageID #: 78



or the public from an immediate danger, like a nearby concealed weapon. Id. at 659. The Eighth

Circuit has held that the public safety exception applies "so long as the questions asked of the

suspect are reasonably prompted by a concern for the public safety," and that has been treated as

including the safety of the officers involved in the situation. U.S. v. Williams, 181 F.3d 945, 953

(8th Cir. 1999) (internal quotation marks omitted). In Williams, the suspect was handcuffed in

his apartment and the police had a search warrant. Before beginning to search, Williams was

asked whether there was "anything we need to be aware of." Williams told the officers about a

gun in the closet. This unwarned question was held not to violate Williams's Fifth Amendment

rights because there might have been weapons in the apartment "that could cause [the officers]

harm if they happened upon them unexpectedly or mishandled them in some way." In the same

vein the initial questions about the location of the guns was well within that public safety

exception.

       The subsequent conversation about the ownership of the guns related primarily to sorting

out Boyer's interest and did not result in incriminating statements in connection with the .22

caliber Marlin that is the subject of this indictment and which was not in the Connecticut mobile

home. Therefore there is no reason that Clark's stray statements about his wife having the key to

the gun cabinet, ownership of the various guns, or Boyer owning one of the guns need be

suppressed.

2.     The kitchen table "chat" with Edwards

       After the weapons were secured and Clark's wife and children were allowed to leave the

premises, Clark's situation became custodial. Although Clark was not handcuffed, his movement

was restricted in that he was compelled to remain at the kitchen table. There were at least six

officers in the premises. Once his wife and children had been allowed to leave and he was




                                                 9
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 10 of 14                      PageID #: 79



forced to remain behind, it would have been objectively reasonable to believe that his freedom of

movement had been substantially restricted. No one told Clark he was not going to be arrested

and indeed all of the available evidence suggests the Connecticut authorities were planning to

arrest him for firearms violations and did so when they were ready. I am satisfied that at this

point in time Clark was "in custody" within the meaning of Miranda. Even though he remained

in his home and the tenor of the search had been entirely co-operative, it was apparent that

Clark's freedom of movement had been substantially restricted.

       At this point Edwards commenced the casual chat about hunting in Maine. I doubt

whether Edwards, at that time, viewed the conversation about hunting in Maine as the functional

equivalent of interrogation. In January of 2004 the "Maine investigation" involved night hunting

charges and the "Connecticut investigation" involved possession of firearms by Clark within that

venue. Federal firearms charges were not part of the picture. Nevertheless, Edwards steered this

conversation to a topic (hunting in Maine for a "big buck" trophy, not night hunting) that

ultimately yielded incriminating statements related to Clark's possession of a firearm, albeit not

the .22 Marlin rifle, in Maine. Of course, the subjective states of mind of Edwards and Clark are

irrelevant; the perspective to be considered is whether a "reasonable person" would view it as the

functional equivalent of interrogation, statements designed to elicit incriminating responses.

Ventura, 85 F.3d at 712. If the hypothetical reasonable person would have known that,

ultimately, Clark would be charged with federal firearms offenses in the District of Maine there

would have been no doubt in that person's mind that the "kitchen table chat" was designed to

elicit incriminating statements.

       Viewing the "kitchen table chat" from that perspective, there is no question in my mind

that the statements by Edwards about hunting in Maine were the "functional equivalent" of an




                                                10
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 11 of 14                        PageID #: 80



interrogation. Steering the conversation to the topic of hunting adventures in Maine was

certainly likely to elicit incriminating responses from Clark, we now know with the benefit of

hindsight. Edwards admits to directing the conversation to these topics; the statements were not

simply blurted out by Clark. In my view, it would be a violation of Miranda for the Government

to now use these unwarned statements against Clark. I suspect that given the professional

manner in which Edwards and Hickey conducted this search and subsequent interrogation, if

Edwards subjectively believed he was interrogating Clark about the charges he would have

provided a Miranda warning in these circumstances. However, as some courts have repeatedly

noted, it is not the subjective belief of either the officer or the suspect that governs the Miranda

inquiry.

3.     The Dugas interview at the kitchen table

       There is no question but that Dugas conducted an investigative interview and did not

administer Miranda warnings. The sole issue is whether Clark was in custody or not by the time

Dugas entered the mobile home and began talking to him. Dugas apparently thinks that because

he told Clark that he had no authority to arrest him in Connecticut, custody was not an issue.

However, that view ignores the six armed members of the Connecticut State Police Firearms

Task Force who had taken control of Clark's house. It also ignores the fact that Clark's wife and

children had been told they could leave and were obviously not placed in custody, whereas Clark

was left behind to speak with Dugas. This case is really the mirror image of McCarty. In that

case a set of statements were obtained from McCarty after the police had finished the search and

were in the process of leaving the residence. One officer remained behind and sat on the sofa

with McCarty and asked him some investigative questions. Before doing so he informed

McCarty that he was not going to be arrested that night and that he was free to leave the house




                                                 11
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 12 of 14                      PageID #: 81



while the officers finished up their work. In McCarty the custodial aspects of the search had

dissipated, whereas here they were building to the crescendo of the formal arrest by Connecticut

state troopers. I am convinced the only reason Clark had not been formally arrested by the state

troopers was as a courtesy to Dugas to allow him whatever questioning he wanted before they

removed Clark from the residence. The fact that Dugas was not involved in the ultimate decision

to formally arrest Clark is irrelevant; the objective facts are that Clark's movement was

substantially restricted, his home was overrun by six officers, and others had been told they

could leave the residence but Clark had to remain seated at the kitchen table. A reasonable

person would believe the situation to be custodial. Accordingly, the unwarned statements made

to Dugas about the night hunting incident in Maine should be suppressed.

4.     The statements provided to Hickey at the detention facility

       Clark relies upon Missouri v. Seibert, 542 U.S. 600 (2004), to support his argument that

the written statement he gave to Hickey at the detention facility should be suppressed because it

is the product of the prior unwarned statements made at the residence. In Seibert the Court

carefully distinguished, but did not overrule, Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298 (1985). Seibert

involved a case where the police questioned a woman at the police station after she had been

awoken at 3:00 a.m. and taken there by an officer. The first interrogation, without Miranda

warning, lasted for some time and finally Seibert made a damaging admission about her son's

death in a fire. She was then given a twenty minute coffee and cigarette break, received Miranda

warnings from the same officer she had just spoken with, was then confronted with her pre-

warning incriminating statements, and ultimately confessed to the crime. In contrast, Elstad

involved a situation where one officer had a brief, almost casual, encounter with the suspect at

his home when he was taken into custody on charges of burglary. The suspect made an




                                                12
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 13 of 14                       PageID #: 82



incriminating statement. Later at the station, after being fully apprised of his Miranda rights, the

suspect made a full confession. The difference between the two cases was summarized thusly:

       The contrast between Elstad and this case reveals a series of relevant
       facts that bear on whether Miranda warnings delivered midstream could be
       effective enough to accomplish their object: the completeness and detail of the
       questions and answers in the first round of interrogation, the overlapping content
       of the two statements, the timing and setting of the first and the second, the
       continuity of police personnel, and the degree to which the interrogator's
       questions treated the second round as continuous with the first. In Elstad, it was
       not unreasonable to see the occasion for questioning at the station house as
       presenting a markedly different experience from the short conversation at home;
       since a reasonable person in the suspect's shoes could have seen the station house
       questioning as a new and distinct experience, the Miranda warnings could have
       made sense as presenting a genuine choice whether to follow up on the earlier
       admission.

Seibert, 542 U.S. at 615-616.

       In Clark's case the two unwarned statements at the home during the search are a total

disconnect from Hickey's interrogation. Hickey had no interest in asking about hunting activities

in Maine and his questions about the .22 Marlin rifle would have been asked even if Clark had

told Dugas nothing about night hunting in Maine and had told Edwards nothing about bagging

his trophy buck. Hickey knew there was a .22 Marlin in play from the Maine investigative

reports before he ever obtained the search warrant. Hickey simply confirmed the existence of

that gun and established that it had never been in Connecticut. He did not follow up about the

November 2003 night hunting incidents. Nor did he question Clark about any of his hunting

activities in Maine.

       Any reasonable person in Clark's shoes, after being warned of his rights under Miranda,

would have understood himself to be in a "new and distinct experience" from the one that took

place at his house. There is no reason to believe that the written statement resulted from any

coerced statements obtained from Clark earlier that evening. The two earlier statements,




                                                 13
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 25 Filed 05/10/07 Page 14 of 14                          PageID #: 83



although technically obtained in violation of Miranda and thus subject to suppression, see

Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 428 (2000), did not have any other unduly coercive aspects

to them. For Clark the Miranda warnings did provide a genuine choice about whether he wanted

to continue being cooperative, as he had been all evening, or change his mind and provide no

further statements. The choice he made was voluntary and made with full knowledge of his

rights.

                                               Conclusion

          Based upon the foregoing I recommend the court grant the motion to suppress as to the

statements made to Edwards and Dugas at the kitchen table. I further recommend that the

motion be denied as to the preliminary statements regarding location of the guns, the key to the

cabinet and the ownership of the guns within the cabinet and as to the written statement provided

to Hickey at the detention facility.

                                                NOTICE

                   A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
          judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
          28 U.S.C. 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
          together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
          district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
          thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
          district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

                 Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
          novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.

                 Unless the district judge directs otherwise, the objecting party must
          promptly arrange for transcribing the record, or portions of it in accordance
          with Fed. R. Crim. P. 59(b)(2).

Dated May 10, 2007                                       /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                                         U.S. Magistrate Judge




                                                   14
