      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 1 of 8



                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                     DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

_______________________________
                               )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA       )
                               )
          v.                   ) CRIMINAL ACTION NO. 07-10313-PBS
                               )
JAMONT DUBOSE,                 )
                               )
               Defendant.      )
_______________________________)


                        MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

                            March 31, 2008

Saris, U.S.D.J.

                             INTRODUCTION

     Defendant Jamont DuBose has been charged with being a felon

in possession of a firearm and ammunition.        He now moves to

suppress his statements and the loaded handgun seized from him

during a stop and frisk on the ground that the police did not

have reasonable suspicion to make the stop.        At the evidentiary

hearing, Officers Emanuel Canuto and Matthew Ryan testified for

the government.   Defendant and Janine Nicolau, a paralegal,

testified for the defense.     After an evidentiary hearing and a

review of the submissions, the motion is DENIED.

                              BACKGROUND

     On February 22, 2007 at about 2:30 p.m., Boston Police

Officers Emanuel Canuto and Matthew Ryan were in plain clothes in

an unmarked car, driving on a routine patrol on Washington

Street, headed toward Fuller Street, in Dorchester.         They were
         Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 2 of 8



driving 15-20 m.p.h.       The area that they were patrolling is

primarily residential, but also includes several small shops.

Although a shooting had occurred about four months earlier in

this general area, it was not a so-called “hot spot” with a

recent unusually active pattern of crime.

     The officers observed a Toyota Camry with two male occupants

driving on Fairmount Street towards its intersection with

Washington Street.      The Camry double-parked on Fairmount,

approximately two to three car lengths from the intersection.            At

the same time, the officers saw a male, later identified as

Defendant Jamont DuBose, walking on Washington Street and then

turning onto Fairmount Street, heading directly for the Camry.

After Defendant reached the Camry, the officers saw him lean into

the car through the window of the driver’s side door; Defendant’s

body from the waist up and both of his hands were inside the car.

He then walked away from the car.         The whole encounter was brief.

The officers could not see what he was doing inside the car.1

     Suspecting they had witnessed a drug transaction, the

officers immediately turned around at the intersection of



     1
      Defendant testified to another version of events which I
don’t find credible. He said he had slept over at his aunt’s
house and was walking on Fairmount Street towards Washington
Street when he passed a stopped car, and the driver asked briefly
if he knew “Terrence.” Defendant said he answered in the
negative and kept walking. He denied going to the driver’s
window or leaning inside the car. However, the two police
officers corroborated each other’s testimony and their testimony
is also consistent with a contemporaneous police report.

                                      2
      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 3 of 8



Washington and Fuller Streets and saw the Camry take a left on

Washington Street, heading towards Fuller Street.         They also saw

Defendant backtrack, returning in the same direction on Fairmount

Street to the intersection, and then taking a left on Washington

Street towards Fuller Street.     The police officers believed this

was a pre-arranged meeting.

     The officers then parked at an angle on the wrong side of

Washington Street and exited the car in order to talk to

Defendant.   Both officers had badges displayed prominently around

their necks.   At that time, Defendant was walking away from the

officers with his back to them.        Officer Canuto asked Defendant,

who was approximately ten feet away, “Excuse me, sir, can I talk

to you for a second?”    Officer Canuto did not yell at Defendant,

but spoke loudly enough to ensure that he would be heard.

Defendant continued walking away and kept his right hand inside

the pocket of his hoodie.     Speaking more loudly, Officer Canuto

asked Defendant at least one or two additional times to turn

around and speak with him.     Officer Canuto believed, correctly,

that Defendant heard him and ignored him the first couple of

times that Officer Canuto spoke to him.       Finally complying with

Officer Canuto’s order, Defendant turned around, keeping his

right hand in his hoodie pocket.

     At this time, Officer Ryan was speaking to some teenage

males who were standing nearby, in front of a pizza shop, and who



                                   3
      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 4 of 8



had asked him why the police were stopping.        Officer Ryan was not

with Officer Canuto when Defendant finally stopped and turned to

Officer Canuto.

     Officer Canuto feared that Defendant was carrying a gun and

told him to remove his hand from his pocket.        Defendant refused

to comply.   Officer Canuto repeated the order several more times

and Defendant eventually complied.      Fearing for his own safety,

Officer Canuto performed a pat-frisk of Defendant’s pocket.           In

this pocket, Officer Canuto felt a hard object he believed to be

consistent with a firearm.     Officer Canuto touched the item

through Defendant’s hoodie and asked, “What is this?”          Defendant

responded, “That’s not mine.”      Officer Canuto reached into the

pocket and pulled out a silver .22 caliber Imperial revolver.

     After Officer Canuto alerted Officer Ryan that he had

retrieved a gun, Defendant ran towards Croftland Avenue.          After a

brief foot chase, which ended in front of 882 Washington Street,

Defendant was caught and placed in handcuffs.        As he was being

placed under arrest, Defendant spontaneously stated, “I just

found it and picked it up.”

     After arresting Defendant, the officers saw the same black

Camry that they had observed approximately five minutes earlier.

They performed a traffic stop.     A Field Interrogation and

Observation was conducted of both the driver and passenger; they

were both released after they were pat-frisked and the car was



                                   4
      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 5 of 8



searched.    Both claimed that they did not know Defendant.

     The gun was loaded with seven rounds of ammunition.

                               DISCUSSION

     Under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 30 (1968), police officers

may perform a brief, investigatory stop of an individual based on

reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.        See United States v.

Moore, 235 F.3d 700, 703 (1st Cir. 2000).       An officer’s “initial

approach and general inquiry” does not trigger Fourth Amendment

scrutiny even when defendant responds.       United States v.

Holloway, 499 F.3d 114, 117 (1st Cir. 2007)        “Under the Fourth

Amendment, a seizure occurs when a police officer, by means of

physical force or a show of authority, has in some way restrained

the liberty of a citizen.”     United States v. Sealey, 30 F.3d 7, 9

(1st Cir. 1994).      In addition, “[t]he show of authority must be

such that a reasonable person would believe that he was not free

to leave.”   Holloway, 499 F.3d at 117.      A seizure also requires

that the person allegedly seized must actually submit to the show

of authority.   Id.     The Supreme Court has explained that “the
crucial test is whether, taking into account all of the

circumstances surrounding the encounter, the police conduct would

have communicated to a reasonable person that he was not at

liberty to ignore the police presence and go about his business.”

Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 437 (1991) (quotation marks

omitted).

     I find that Defendant was seized when Officer Canuto,


                                    5
      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 6 of 8



wearing his badge prominently, told him to remove his hand from

his pocket.    At that point, a reasonable person would believe he

was not at liberty to ignore the police order and leave.
     The crux of the parties’ dispute is whether or not Officer

Canuto had the reasonable suspicion necessary to conduct a Terry

stop of Defendant.   “[T]he applicable standard in determining the

propriety of a Terry stop is whether a defendant's acts give rise

to an articulable, reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.”

United States v. Trullo, 809 F.2d 108, 112 (1st Cir. 1987).           The

standard is objective; the relevant inquiry is “would the facts

available to the officer at the moment of the seizure or the

search warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that the

action taken was appropriate?”     Terry, 392 U.S. at 21-22

(quotation marks omitted).

     Defendant maintains that the officers did not have the

reasonable suspicion that he was engaged in an unlawful drug

transaction.   Defendant points out that the encounter took place

in broad daylight in a neighborhood not considered to be a high-
crime area.
     The government answers that the officers reasonably

considered Defendant’s brief encounter with the car to be

suspicious because of both the apparently pre-arranged nature of

the meeting and his leaning his entire upper body through the

driver’s side window. See Trullo, 809 F.2d at 112 (“In the

officers’ judgment a clandestine transaction had taken place, a


                                   6
      Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 7 of 8



judgment to which we give appropriate deference.”).

     Once Defendant turned around in response to the officer’s

inquiry and kept his hand in his pocket, Officer Canuto

appropriately ordered him to remove his hand from his pocket and

frisked him in order to protect his own safety.        See Terry, 392

U.S. at 30 (“where a police officer observes unusual conduct

which leads him reasonably to conclude in light of his experience

that criminal activity may be afoot and that the persons with

whom he is dealing may be armed and presently dangerous, where in

the course of investigating this behavior he identifies himself

as a policeman and makes reasonable inquiries, and where nothing

in the initial stages of the encounter serves to dispel his

reasonable fear for his own or others’ safety, he is entitled for

the protection of himself and others in the area to conduct a

carefully limited search of the outer clothing of such persons in

an attempt to discover weapons which might be used to assault

him.”).




                                   7
 Case 1:07-cr-10313-PBS Document 27 Filed 03/31/08 Page 8 of 8



                            ORDER

Defendant’s motion to suppress [Docket No. 14] is DENIED.




                                    S/PATTI B. SARIS
                                    United States District Judge




                              8
