Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 1 of 7                    PageID #: 160



                                UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                      )
                                              )
           v.                                 )      CR-04-44-B-W
                                              )
DAREN J. CLARK,                               )
                                              )
                   Defendant.                 )


                     ORDER AFFIRMING THE RECOMMENDED DECISION
                              OF THE MAGISTRATE JUDGE

           The Court overrules the Defendant’s objections to the magistrate judge’s recommended

decision, concluding not only that the magistrate judge properly applied Missouri v. Seibert,1 but

also that, once the five Seibert factors are expressly analyzed, the Recommended Decision must

be affirmed.

I.         BACKGROUND

           On May 13, 2004, a federal grand jury in the district of Maine issued a one count

indictment against Daren J. Clark for possessing a firearm after having been convicted of a

felony in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Indictment (Docket # 4). On March 16, 2007, Mr.

Clark moved to suppress statements, admissions, and answers he made on January 14, 2004, both

before and after he was arrested. Def.’s Pretrial Mot. to Suppress Statements, Admissions, and

Answers (Docket # 19). Magistrate Judge Kravchuk held an evidentiary hearing on May 7, 2007,

and on May 10, 2007, she issued a Recommended Decision, recommending that the Court grant

the motion as to some, but not all the Defendant’s statements. Recommended Decision (Docket

# 25).



1
    542 U.S. 600 (2004).
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 2 of 7                   PageID #: 161



       Mr. Clark has objected. Def.’s Obj. to Report and Recommendation (Docket # 26)

(Def.’s Obj.).   Conceding that the magistrate judge correctly cited Seibert as controlling

authority, Mr. Clark argues that her “factual and legal analysis largely fails to follow the

direction set forth by the Supreme Court.” Id. at 3. He recounts the five factors in Seibert and

urges the Court to conclude that, when analyzed, his statements, including his written statement,

should be suppressed.

       The magistrate judge’s recommended decision describes four conversations between Mr.

Clark and law enforcement officers: (1) preliminary statements made by Mr. Clark concerning

the location and ownership of the firearms; (2) a “casual chat” at Mr. Clark’s kitchen table with

Trooper Darren Edwards of the Connecticut State Police; (3) an interview again at Mr. Clark’s

kitchen table with Warden Philip Dugas of the Maine Warden Service; and, (4) a later interview

at the state police barracks with Trooper David Hickey of the Connecticut State Police.

Magistrate Judge Kravchuk recommended that that the preliminary statements about the location

and ownership of the firearms not be suppressed, that the statements Mr. Clark made during the

kitchen table conversations with Trooper Edwards and Warden Dugas be suppressed, and that

the barracks statements (including a written statement) that he made during the third interview

with Trooper Hickey not be suppressed. Mr. Clark has not objected to the magistrate judge’s

recommendation regarding the preliminary statements about the location and ownership of the

firearms; his sole objection is to the failure to recommend suppression of the barracks

statements. Def.’s Obj. at 2. The Court overrules his objection and affirms the magistrate

judge’s recommended decision.




                                               2
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 3 of 7                    PageID #: 162



II.    DISCUSSION

       A. The Alleged Failure to Articulate

       The Court remains unconvinced that the magistrate judge misapplied Seibert. Even

though the magistrate judge properly cited Seibert, Mr. Clark contends that she failed to follow

it, because the Recommended Decision does not expressly analyze every Seibert factor. Just this

week, the United States Supreme Court addressed this type of argument in Rita v. United States,

No. 06-5754, 2007 U.S. LEXIS 8269, at *33 (June 21, 2007):

               The appropriateness of brevity or length, conciseness or detail,
               when to write, what to say, depends upon circumstances.
               Sometimes a judicial opinion responds to every argument;
               sometimes it does not; sometimes a judge simply writes the word
               “granted,” or “denied” on the face of a motion while relying upon
               context and the parties' prior arguments to make the reasons clear.
               The law leaves much, in this respect, to the judge’s own
               professional judgment.

Id. In describing her analysis, the magistrate judge’s recommended decision fits well within an

acceptable range of her professional judgment. In similar cases within this circuit and district,

the courts have not articulated and individually applied each Seibert criterion. See, e.g., United

States v. Materas, 483 F.3d 27, 33 (1st Cir. 2007); United States v. Mastera, Crim. No. 04-50-P-

S, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15538, at *8-9 (D. Me. Aug. 6, 2004); United States v. Libby, Crim.

No. 04-26-B-W, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14581, at * 18-19 (D. Me. July 30, 2004).

       B. Application of the Seibert Factors

       Before applying the Seibert factors, it bears mentioning that the Court views Seibert as

markedly distinct from this case. In Seibert, the arresting officer was explicitly instructed by

another officer not to Mirandize the defendant. Id. at 604. Once the defendant arrived at the

station house, the other officer conducted a 30-40 minute interrogation without Miranda

warnings, and he elicited an incriminating admission. Id. at 605. The officer then gave the



                                                3
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 4 of 7                                          PageID #: 163



defendant a 20-minute cigarette and coffee break, after which he turned on a tape recorder,

obtained a waiver of her Miranda rights on the record, and continued to interrogate the

defendant, who reiterated her pre-Miranda statements. Id. The Supreme Court characterized

this sequence as “a police strategy adapted to undermine the Miranda warnings.” Id. at 616.

Based on the record in this case, Seibert is strikingly dissimilar; here, there is simply no evidence

of such a “police strategy.” 2 See Materas, 483 F.3d at 33 (analyzing whether there was

“evidence that the police were attempting to undermine the purposes of the Miranda rule to gain

subsequent Mirandized confessions.”).

           Further, the Court does not view Seibert as establishing a rigid analytic framework that

each court, regardless of the underlying facts, must separately analyze. In contrasting the facts in

Seibert with the facts in Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298 (1985), the Seibert Court discussed what

it termed a “series of relevant facts” that “bear on whether Miranda warnings delivered

midstream could be effective enough to accomplish their object.” Seibert, 542 U.S. at 615.

Seibert did not suggest that these five relevant factors are either exclusive or mandatory.

Nevertheless, in excess of caution, since the Defendant has objected to the absence of an explicit

five-factor analysis, the Court will address each Seibert factor.

           The first factor is “the completeness and detail of the questions and answers in the first

round of interrogation.” At issue are two question-and-answer sessions and their relationship, if

any, with the third barracks conversation. During the “casual chat,” although Officer Edwards

and Mr. Clark generally discussed hunting in Maine, there was no mention of the .22 Marlin

rifle, which was the subject of the Maine investigation and the pending federal charge. By

contrast, Warden Dugas’s interrogation was fairly circumscribed, focusing only on illegal

hunting activities and the .22 rifle that Mr. Clark allegedly used in Maine. In response to the
2
    The essential inapplicability of Seibert explains why the magistrate judge did not belabor its five -factor analysis.


                                                              4
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 5 of 7                     PageID #: 164



warden’s questions, Mr. Clark admitted using the rifle during a night hunting trip. Thus, the first

chat was neither complete nor detailed; the second interview was at the same time more detailed,

but less complete.

       Second, as to “the overlapping content of the two statements,” Mr. Clark provided

Trooper Hickey with a signed statement, which basically chronicles his gun purchases over a

span of years. One firearm was the .22 Magnum rifle at issue; Mr. Clark stated that he bought

the rifle in Maine from his uncle, that it was meant for his 8-year-old daughter when she is old

enough, and that it has been kept in Maine, not Connecticut. The remainder of the statement

does not overlap with the statements Mr. Clark made to Warden Dugas or to Trooper Edwards.

Thus, while there is some overlap, it is insufficient to conclude that the two conversations

comprised a continuous interrogation.

       Third, “the timing and setting of the first and second” statements does not support

suppression of the Mirandized statement. Mr. Clark made his initial statements at his home,

sitting around the kitchen table with Warden Dugas and Trooper Edwards. He made the second,

written statement some time later, after Connecticut State Police had arrested him, had taken him

to the station house, and had read him his Miranda rights. In the Court’s view, a reasonable

person in Mr. Clark’s position would have recognized the second interrogation as a “new and

distinct experience.” Seibert, 542 U.S. at 616.

       As regards “the continuity of police personnel,” this fourth factor also does not favor

suppression. Although Trooper Hickey was one of the officers in the house during execution of

the search warrant, he had limited contact with Mr. Clark, and did not participate in either

Trooper Edwards’s “casual chat” or Warden Dugas’s interrogation.           There is little, if any,

continuity of police personnel between the interrogations.




                                                  5
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 6 of 7                         PageID #: 165



          The fifth and final Seibert factor is “the degree to which the interrogator’s questions

treated the second round as continuous with the first.” Here, there is nothing to suggest that

Trooper Hickey was treating his interrogation as an extension of the interrogation that took place

in Mr. Clark’s home. As the magistrate judge pointed out, he was not involved in Warden

Dugas’s interview, nor did he participate in the “casual chat” at the kitchen table. Moreover,

unlike Seibert, there is no suggestion that Trooper Hickey referred back to the previous

interrogation. Thus, the Court rejects Mr. Clark’s attempt to characterize Trooper Hickey’s

questioning as “continuous;” to the contrary, the absence of continuous questioning reflects one

essential difference between this case and Seibert.

          Expressly applying the five Seibert factors to the facts in this case, the Court concurs with

the magistrate judge’s recommendations.

III.      CONCLUSION

          The Court has reviewed and considered the Magistrate Judge’s Recommended Decision,

together with the entire record; it has made a de novo determination of all matters adjudicated by

the Magistrate Judge’s Recommended Decision; and the Court concurs with the

recommendations of the Magistrate Judge for the reasons set forth in her Recommended

Decision, and for the additional reasons set forth herein and determines that no further

proceeding is necessary.

       1. It is therefore ORDERED that the Recommended Decision of the Magistrate Judge is
          hereby AFFIRMED.

       2. It is further ORDERED that the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress (Docket # 19) is
          GRANTED as to the statements made to Trooper Edwards and Warden Dugas at the
          kitchen table and DENIED as to the preliminary statements regarding location of the
          guns, the key to the cabinet and the ownership of the guns within the cabinet and as to the
          written statement provided to Hickey at the detention facility.




                                                   6
Case 1:04-cr-00044-JAW Document 29 Filed 06/28/07 Page 7 of 7   PageID #: 166



       SO ORDERED.


                                    /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                    JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


Dated this 28th day of June, 2007




                                      7
