    Case 2:00-cr-00043-DBH Document 37 Filed 12/12/07 Page 1 of 5                 PageID #: 30



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                      )
                                              )
                                              )
                                              )
v.                                            )              CRIMINAL NO. 00-43-P-H
                                              )
MICHAEL R. LaPLANTE,                          )
                                              )
                        DEFENDANT             )


                   ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTIONS TO MODIFY
                      CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISED RELEASE


          On October 9, 2007, I conducted a hearing on a petition to revoke Michael

LaPlante’s supervised release. Upon the submission of documentary evidence, I

found that LaPlante had violated two terms of his supervised release by

committing the state crime of terrorizing and by using alcohol in January of 2006.

The terrorizing was directed against LaPlante’s wife1 and involved threatening and

poking her with a 2.5 foot metal pipe. See Gov’t Ex. 1.

          During the dispositional portion of the hearing, the government introduced

additional exhibits. They supported the Probation Officer’s Revocation Report,

describing a separate, much more recent, incident in August of 2007, when

LaPlante stabbed a couch immediately adjacent to where his wife’s 10-year-old

son was sitting. See Gov’t Exs. 8-9.



1
    At the time of the 2006 incident, they were not married. They married later, in February 2007.
Case 2:00-cr-00043-DBH Document 37 Filed 12/12/07 Page 2 of 5                 PageID #: 31



      In his oral statement to me at sentencing on the supervision violations,

LaPlante said:

              I met this lady . . . and later married her, not realizing this
              person could be the downfall of my life and my supervised
              release. . . .

              [E]verything was just great, all except for the woman I chose
              to be my wife for the rest of my life. I’ve never tried harder at
              anything than with her and our relationship. I went back to
              her over and over again hoping that I could change her into a
              good person, but unfortunately it never happened.

              I finally realize now, and hopefully not too late, that there is
              no hope for her and I and it is without a doubt time to move
              on and make a life for myself. I’ve pushed and pushed to try
              to get help for my bipolar disorder and Your Honor, I’ve finally
              succeeded, which is a real awesome feeling and a situation so
              greatly needed.

              I’m asking the Court to give me the one chance to prove
              myself and let me pick myself back up and do what I need to
              do to get back on my feet. Now being on medication and with
              my thinking cap on and make a good life for myself. Doing
              the paperwork to making my wife my ex and getting a lifelong
              protection order served on her will happen immediately once I
              am released.

Tr. at 17-19. I sentenced LaPlante to six months in prison, followed by fifty

months of supervised release. Among other conditions of supervised release, I

required mental health treatment, compliance with any prescribed medication

regimen,     abstinence    from    alcohol    or   controlled    substances,      and   “no

communication or contact with [his wife], unless granted permission to do so by

the U.S. Probation Office.” Revocation Judgment (Docket Item 31).

      LaPlante has now filed two successive motions to modify the conditions of

supervised release, asking that I remove the restriction on contact with his wife.

He states:

                                                                                          2
Case 2:00-cr-00043-DBH Document 37 Filed 12/12/07 Page 3 of 5            PageID #: 32



            As of February 14, 2007 we officially made ourselves life long
            partners and were married in the town of Saco, Maine. We
            are devoted to each other and plan to keep raising my step
            son … as well as our whole family in a structured
            environment.

Mot. for Modification of Supervised Release (Docket Item 36) at 1. LaPlante

maintains that now he is taking “correct medication” for his bipolar disorder and

that his wife is now on medication for lyme disease and that counseling for her

will help their marriage and family. Id. He expects to be released March 6, 2008.

Id. at 2. He says that the limitation I imposed violates the due process clause of

the Fifth Amendment because it interferes with intimate relationships. Id. at 1.

The government objects to the requested modification. See Gov’t Opp’n to Def.’s

Mot. to Modify Sentence (Docket Item 35).

      The time has passed for correction of a sentence under Fed. R. Crim. P.

35(a) (7 days) and for filing a notice of appeal of the sentence under Fed. R. App.

P. 4(b) (10 days).   Nevertheless, under Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1 and 18 U.S.C.

§ 3583(e)(2), a court may modify a condition of supervised release at any time

before supervised release expires. The motion, therefore, is timely. I decline to

modify the condition at this time, however, for these reasons:

      (1)   History demonstrates that LaPlante sometimes fails to maintain his

medication regimen and that his conduct toward his wife and her child has been

volatile and physically dangerous.

      (2)   Despite the violence that LaPlante has exhibited toward his wife and

her child, I recognized the conjugal relationship by not making the contact

prohibition outright, but subject to Probation Office consent.          I shaped the

                                                                                    3
 Case 2:00-cr-00043-DBH Document 37 Filed 12/12/07 Page 4 of 5         PageID #: 33



condition to account for LaPlante’s sometimes unstable medical condition, his

medication practices, circumstances that would provide safety for his wife and her

child, etc.

      (3)       I cannot know now the circumstances as they will exist when LaPlante

is released. Obviously, LaPlante’s attitude toward his wife is subject to change, as

demonstrated by the contrast between his statements about her at the hearing in

October and those in his current motions.

      (4)       This case is quite unlike United States v. Roberts, No. 04-00037-1

and No. 04-00037-2, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 55950 (E.D. Pa. July 31, 2007), a

case that LaPlante cites. There, the crime was drug dealing, and no violence was

alleged.      As a result of the standard condition of supervised release that a

defendant not associate with any other felon except with a probation officer’s

permission, U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 5D1.3(c)(9), gay partners (each

was convicted of the drug dealing crime) with a cohabitation history of 18 years

and a child they had raised were prohibited from communication or contact after

their release from prison. United States v. Roberts, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 55950,

at 6. There was no issue of violence or even of resuming their illegal activities.

Considering the case on appeal, the Third Circuit noted that the Probation Office

improperly “read[] the District Court’s order as mandating that defendants not be

granted permission to associate with one another except under extraordinary

circumstances,” United States v. Roberts, 229 Fed. Appx. 172, 175 (3d Cir. 2007),

and “instruct[ed] the District Court on remand to address defendants’ actual

request, which is for modification or clarification of the proper application of the
                                                                                  4
Case 2:00-cr-00043-DBH Document 37 Filed 12/12/07 Page 5 of 5        PageID #: 34



anti-association condition, in light of the probation office’s allegedly unlawful

exercise of its discretion.” Id. at 178. On remand, the sentencing judge ordered

the probation office to allow the defendants to associate in person, by telephone,

by mail, and by email, but required separate permission for any change of

residence. United States v. Roberts, 2007 WL 55950, at *16-17.

      Here, in contrast to Roberts, the condition I imposed is not a standard

condition, but is specially devised to deal with LaPlante’s medical condition and

his history of violence toward his wife and her son. It gives the Probation Officer

authority to craft appropriate conditions for contact or communication, if the

circumstances safely permit.     I cannot predict now what LaPlante’s medical

condition will be upon his release, nor what his attitude then will be toward his

wife and her son, nor what conditions the Probation Officer may impose as

appropriate under the circumstances as they then exist.

      Accordingly, I DENY LaPlante’s motion to modify this condition of supervised

release at this time. The time to determine whether the condition is appropriate or

appropriately applied is after LaPlante is released and after the Probation Office

determines what circumstances, if any, allow communication/contact between

LaPlante and his wife.

      SO ORDERED.

      DATED THIS 12TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2007



                                            /S/D. BROCK HORNBY
                                            D. BROCK HORNBY
                                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
                                                                                 5
