Case 1:02-cr-00093-JAW Document 160 Filed 12/05/07 Page 1 of 4                          PageID #: 48



                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                   DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                )
                                                        )
v.                                                      )       Crim. No. 02-93-B-W
                                                        )
NEAL RAY COLBY,                                         )
                                                        )
                        Defendant                       )



                                               ORDER

        This matter came before me earlier today for a preliminary hearing pursuant to Fed. R. Crim.

P. 32.1(a)(1). The defendant appeared with counsel, waived his right to a preliminary hearing and

consented to the entry of a finding of probable cause to hold him for a revocation hearing.

Accordingly, I FIND probable cause to hold the defendant for a revocation hearing.

        A release hearing was held at the defendant’s request for the purpose of determining whether

he is eligible for release pending the revocation hearing. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1(a)(6). The

standards governing release in these circumstances are those prescribed in 18 U.S.C. § 3143(a). Id.

Thus, the defendant is entitled to be released if he establishes, by clear and convincing evidence, that

he is not likely to flee or pose a danger to the safety of any other person or the community if released

pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3142(b) or (c).

        The defendant was sentenced to a term of imprisonment on October 19, 2004 following his

conviction in this court for possession of stolen firearms and Hobbs Act robbery. He has a

troublesome history of poly-substance abuse. According to the pre-sentence report, when arrested at

age 19 on the underlying charges he admitted that he was a daily abuser of marijuana and a regular


                                                   1
Case 1:02-cr-00093-JAW Document 160 Filed 12/05/07 Page 2 of 4                             PageID #: 49



user of alcohol. He also stated that he had experimented with Oxycontin, heroin, crack cocaine and

cocaine in the past. Upon completion of his original sentence, the defendant entered upon supervised

release on conditions that included a requirement that he abstain from the use of any alcoholic

beverages, that he not associate with individuals consuming alcoholic beverages and that he not

associate with any person convicted of a felony unless granted permission to do so by his probation

officer.

           It is clear from this hearing record that the defendant continues to use and abuse alcohol and

that when he does so trouble often results. Specific incidents include:

           •   The defendant was drinking alcohol on November 10, 2007 with Alicia Gouzie, a

               convicted felon and someone with whom he was specifically prohibited from having

               contact by his supervising probation officer. On that occasion, Gouzie fell over a rail and

               broke her arm.

           •   On November 23, 2007 two juvenile females complained to the Penobscot County

               Sheriff’s Office that the defendant had arrived at their residence in Dixmont after midnight,

               would not leave and had passed out in their back bedroom. When the investigating deputy

               arrived, he found the defendant naked and asleep in the residence. An intoxilizer test

               yielded a BAC result of .12.

           •   In late November 2007 the defendant’s mother reported to Probation Officer Ryan Petroff

               her concern that the defendant was continuing to have contact with Gouzie and that he had

               not shown up for work on November 30th. She indicated that the defendant admitted to her

               that he had been drinking with friends on November 29th causing him to miss work on

               November 30th.



                                                       2
Case 1:02-cr-00093-JAW Document 160 Filed 12/05/07 Page 3 of 4                          PageID #: 50



        These incidents illustrate not only that the defendant continues to consume alcohol in violation

of his conditions of release, but that when he does so he often drinks to excess with the result that his

judgment is often impaired in a way that poses a significant risk of danger to the community. The

defendant’s suggestion that a condition of release that places him on home confinement will adequately

address this risk misses the mark. Such a condition, without more, will not reasonably insure that the

defendant will not continue to consume alcohol in circumstances that expose the community to danger.

No proffer has been made of a proposed suitable third-party custodian, and no such prospect has even

been identified. Certainly the defendant’s mother would not qualify inasmuch as she has admitted that

she has engaged in alcohol consumption with the defendant in circumstances in which I infer that she is

well aware of the condition of release that prohibits him from doing so. The government does not

contend that the defendant poses a risk of flight. But on this record, and given the nature of the

offending conduct underlying the petition for revocation, I can only conclude that the defendant has

failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that he is not likely to pose a danger to the safety

of the community if released pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3142(b) or (c).

        The defendant is committed to the custody of the Attorney General or his designated

representative for confinement in a corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody pending appeal. The defendant shall

be afforded a reasonable opportunity for private consultation with his counsel. On order of a court of

the United States or on request of an attorney for the government, the person in charge of the

corrections facility shall deliver the defendant to the United States Marshal for the purposes of an

appearance in connection with a court proceeding.



        Dated this 5th day of December, 2007.

                                                   3
Case 1:02-cr-00093-JAW Document 160 Filed 12/05/07 Page 4 of 4        PageID #: 51



                                         /s/ David M. Cohen
                                         David M. Cohen
                                         United States Magistrate Judge




                                     4
