      Case 1:08-cr-10097-PBS Document 32 Filed 11/14/08 Page 1 of 5



               Q:\US V MITCHELL MOTION TO SUPPRESS.WPD

                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


                               )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA       )
                               )
          v.                   ) CRIMINAL NO. 08-10097-PBS
                               )
WARREN MITCHELL,               )
           Defendant.          )
                               )
                        MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

                           November 14, 2008

Saris, U.S.D.J.

     Defendant Warren Mitchell moves to suppress the gun, drugs

and other evidence seized from his car, claiming that the stop

and search that led to their discovery were unlawful.          He also

seeks to suppress statements he made subsequently as fruit of the

poisonous tree.    At an evidentiary hearing on October 21, 2008,

the government introduced the testimony of Brian Oppedisano, the

case agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms

(“ATF”), Boston Police Officer John Conway, and State Trooper

Stephen Johnson.   Defendant testified.      After hearing, the motion

is DENIED.

                           FINDINGS OF FACT

     An informant told Agent Oppedisano that Mitchell was a

marijuana dealer who was in possession of a firearm, a .40

caliber Taurus handgun.    The informant had given the ATF reliable

information fifteen years earlier.      In a previous ATF

investigation, in 2002, Mitchell had been suspected of using a
      Case 1:08-cr-10097-PBS Document 32 Filed 11/14/08 Page 2 of 5



straw purchaser to obtain firearms in Rhode Island.         ATF sought

the assistance of the Boston Police Department’s Youth Violence

Strike Force to corroborate the informant’s allegations. To

protect the identity of the informant, Agent Oppedisano told

Detective Sgt. Fitzgerald to do a “walled-off stop.”         This police

lingo means that the local police were being instructed to

develop their own probable cause for the stop.        Oppedisano told

Fitzgerald that the informant had stated that Mitchell would be

moving from his residence at 637 Walk Hill Road in Mattapan, his

belongings would include marijuana, and he would have a firearm.

     As a result of this information, on March 31, 2008, Trooper

Johnson began surveillance at Mitchell’s house in an unmarked

police car.   After staking out his house, Johnson observed

Mitchell loading up his car, a blue Jaguar.        Mitchell began to

drive away at approximately 8:10 p.m.       Johnson tailed him and

observed multiple traffic violations as he drove from the area,

including a defective tail light and failure to signal.          At some

point earlier during the surveillance, the police had also become

aware of a missing front license plate.       Johnson communicated

this information to Sergeant Tarantino and Officers Bickerton and

Conway, who had been waiting nearby in an unmarked police

cruiser.

     Tarantino, Bickerton, and Conway subsequently pulled behind

Mitchell and eventually pulled Mitchell over near the

intersection of Blue Hill Avenue and Fessenden Street.          Johnson

also stopped to assist.    While obtaining the defendant’s license


                                   2
         Case 1:08-cr-10097-PBS Document 32 Filed 11/14/08 Page 3 of 5



and registration, Officer Conway, at the driver’s side, noticed

the smell of unburnt marijuana and asked Mitchell if he had any

“weed” in the car.      Mitchell admitted he had a “bag” on him.1        He

was immediately asked to get out of the car and Officer Conway

observed a knife attached to his right front pocket; Officer

Conway recovered the knife and also a bag of marijuana from

Mitchell’s right front pocket and placed him under arrest.

Entering the car, the officers also smelled marijuana emanating

from the back of the car.        On the back seat, they found a duffle

bag containing a loaded gun and drug paraphernalia including a

grinder used to process marijuana.         The grinder was in the pocket

of the duffle bag.

     According to Johnson, there was an even stronger smell of

marijuana in the locked trunk.        In the trunk, the officers found

another duffel bag containing an additional half-pound of

marijuana in ziploc plastic bags inside a pillow case.             They also

found additional drug processing equipment and a loaded magazine.

Mitchell was transported to District B-3 in which he gave an

interview admitting that the gun and marijuana were his.
                            CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

     1.    The police had probable cause to stop the car for

traffic violations: a defective rear brake light; failure to

signal; and a missing front license plate.           See Whren v. United


     1
       Mitchell denies he made this statement, but he was not a
credible witness. Although he had a large quantity of marijuana
in his car, he testified implausibly that he neither smoked nor
sold it.

                                      3
      Case 1:08-cr-10097-PBS Document 32 Filed 11/14/08 Page 4 of 5



States, 517 U.S. 806, 810 (1996).

      2.   Based on the information from the informant, the smell

of unburnt marijuana, and, most importantly, the defendant’s own

admission, the officers had probable cause to believe Mitchell

possessed marijuana and to place him under arrest.         Defendant

vigorously disputes the police officers’ testimony that they

could have smelled the marijuana in the passenger compartment

emanating from the duffel bag in the trunk.        While that may be

true, I find the officers credible that they smelled unburnt

marijuana emanating from somewhere in the back of the car.            This

was in the police report and both police officers corroborated

each other, and there was a grinder with marijuana in the pocket

of the duffel bag in the back seat.      Because they had probable

cause to arrest him, the officers had the right to ask Mitchell

to get out of the car and search him.       See Rawlings v. Kentucky,
448 U.S. 98, 111 (1980) (“Where the formal arrest followed

quickly on the heels of the challenged search of petitioner’s

person, we do not believe it particularly important that the

search preceded the arrest rather than vice versa.”).

Additionally, once the police officers had lawfully pulled

Mitchell over for a suspected traffic violation, it was lawful

for them to require Mitchell to step out of the car.         United
States v. Coplin, 463 F.3d 96, 102 (1st Cir. 2006).         Once he was

out of the car, based on the knife visible on his pocket and the

credible informant’s information, see United States v. Greenburg,

410 F.3d 63, 67 (1st Cir. 2005) (“evidence of the informant’s


                                   4
         Case 1:08-cr-10097-PBS Document 32 Filed 11/14/08 Page 5 of 5



prior credibility. . . may be all that is needed to establish

probable cause”), the officers were justified in believing that

Mitchell was armed and dangerous, and they were thus permitted to

perform a pat-frisk.       United States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71

(1st Cir. 2004).

     3.    The search of the passenger compartment of the car was

proper because it was incident to his lawful arrest for marijuana

possession.     New York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454, 460 (1981).2
                                    ORDER

     The motion to suppress (Docket No. 23) is DENIED.



                                             /s/ Patti B. Saris
                                            PATTI B. SARIS
                                            United States District Judge




     2
       The parties have not addressed, and the Court makes no
ruling on, the legality of the search of Mitchell’s trunk.

                                       5
