Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 1 of 21                                                     PageID #: 97



                                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                             DISTRICT OF MAINE



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                       )
                                                               )
v.                                                             )                    Criminal No. 07-99-P-S
                                                               )
CHRISTOPHER POULOS,                                            )
                                                               )
                               Defendant                       )



                       RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


          Christopher Poulos, charged with four counts of cocaine distribution in violation of 21 U.S.C.

§ 841(a)(1) and one count of possession of a firearm (a Ruger .357 revolver) in furtherance of a drug-

trafficking crime in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i), seeks to suppress evidence seized from

his Portland, Maine apartment on April 9, 2007 pursuant to a search warrant. See Indictment (Docket

No. 3); Motion To Suppress Evidence, etc. (“Motion”) (Docket No. 25).1 An evidentiary hearing was

held before me on January 18, 2008 at which the defendant appeared with counsel and at the

conclusion of which counsel for both sides argued orally. I now recommend that the following

findings of fact be adopted and that the Motion be denied.

                                               I. Proposed Findings of Fact

          In February 2007 Kevin Cashman, a Portland, Maine police detective assigned to work as a

special agent for the Maine Drug Enforcement Agency (“MDEA”), received information from a


1
  The defendant also initially sought to suppress statements, see Motion at 11-12; however, at hearing, counsel for the government
confirmed that the government will not seek to introduce, in its case-in-chief, any statements made by the defendant to officers on April
(continued on next page)

                                                                   1
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 2 of 21                                               PageID #: 98



confidential informant (“CI”) that an individual named Christopher Poulos (the “defendant”) was

selling drugs. The CI agreed to participate in controlled purchases of drugs from the defendant and

proceeded to do so on four occasions (March 1, 6, 14 and 23, 2007). Following one of the controlled

drug purchases, the CI informed Cashman that he saw the defendant placing a silver handgun above a

ceiling tile in the kitchen/living-room area as he entered the defendant’s apartment.

         Subsequently, in April 2007, Cashman learned that Portland police were investigating a

suspected discharge of a firearm from the defendant’s apartment (located in the basement of 202 Coyle

Street in Portland, Maine). Cashman became involved in that investigation and was assigned the task

of preparing an affidavit in support of an application for a warrant to search the defendant’s apartment.

On April 9, 2007 he prepared an affidavit and a proposed warrant authorizing that search. The

affidavit sought, and the proposed warrant stated that it would grant, authority to search for the

following property or articles:

         A.        Firearms, ammunition, explosive devices or other devices which by design or
                   use are capable of producing serious bodily injury, and which by their
                   concealment, placement or condition are used, intended for use, or capable of
                   use to defend, protect, guard or secure the premises to be searched, its
                   contents, and/or any occupant. Items, including, but not limited to: Bullet
                   casings, Gun shot residue, and Damage to the interior of the residence caused
                   by the discharge of a firearm.

         B.        Evidence demonstrating identity, possession, dominion, custody or control by
                   any and all individuals over/in the premises to be searched or any portion
                   thereof ONLY IF SUCH PREMISES IS IN FACT FOUND TO CONTAIN
                   any other described item(s), including, but not limited to: fingerprints, hairs,
                   fibers, nail clippings; clothing such as shirts, shoes; documents such as titles,
                   deeds, bills, books, receipts, blank checks containing names and/or addresses,
                   canceled checks containing names and/or addresses, records, addressed mail;
                   photographs; videotapes, keys; prescription bottles; personalized property
                   such as engraved trophies, stationery, pens; all of which are evidence of the
                   offenses of possession, furnishing, and/or trafficking scheduled drugs and
____________________________
9, 2007. Defense counsel agreed that the government’s position moots that portion of his motion seeking suppression of statements.


                                                                2
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 3 of 21                         PageID #: 99



               which are seizable pursuant to Maine Rule of Criminal Procedure 41 and/or
               Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80I.

Search Warrant (“Warrant”), Joint Exh. 1, at 2; Affidavit and Request For Search Warrant

(“Affidavit”), attached thereto, at [2]. In the Affidavit, under the heading “Reason for Seizure,”

Cashman checked boxes indicating: “Property that constitutes evidence of the commission of a

criminal offense”; “Contraband under 17-A.M.R.S.A. § 211 Reckless Conduct”; “The fruits of crime,

or things otherwise criminally possessed, to wit, Reckless Conduct (17-A M.R.S.A. § 211)”; and

“Property designed or intended for use or which is or has been used as the means of committing a

criminal offense.” Affidavit at [2]. Cashman described, in section III of his Affidavit, the following

as facts and circumstances supporting probable cause for issuance of the requested warrant:

               A.     I am currently conducting an ongoing investigation concerning the
       alleged discharge of a firearm from the residence of Christopher Poulos at 202 Coyle
       St. (basement apartment) into the first floor apartment of the same building.

               B.      On 04/09/07, I received a copy of a Portland PD [Police Department]
       report detailing an investigation into an alleged firearm discharge in the apartment of
       Christopher Poulos, located at 202 Coyle St. (basement apartment) in Portland, Maine.

                C.      The report states that [on] 04/08/07, at approximately 2100 hours,
       Portland Police Officers Ryan Rooney and Chris Mitchell responded to 202 Coyle St.
       (basement apartment) to meet with Christopher and Christina Marsh (202 Coyle St. #1)
       for a report of a possible bullet hole in their apartment. Christopher Marsh told
       Officers that he noticed a hole in his kitchen cabinet on 04/04/07. There were shards
       of wood spread throughout his kitchen. It appeared to Marsh that someone had tried to
       drill a hole from the outside in and he found this suspicious. Marsh called his landlord
       who checked with the upstairs apartment and did not notice anything suspicious from
       that location.

               D.      The report also states that Marsh then told Officers that on 04/08/07, at
       approximately 1900 hours, he noticed a small hole in his kitchen floor. He did not
       notice this earlier. He wrote in his statement that he thought it was a bullet hole
       because the hole was caused by something that came from downstairs. Marsh told
       Officers that his downstairs neighbor was Christopher Poulos [Affiant note: I have
       spoken with Portland Police Detective Mary Sauschuck on several occasions.
       Detective Sauschuck is assigned to the Portland PD intelligence unit and part of her
       responsibility is collecting information on known gang members in the Portland

                                                  3
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 4 of 21                         PageID #: 100



       area. Detective Sauschuck told me that Christopher Poulos is a known member of
       FSU, a Portland gang known to traffic in drugs and firearms as well as engage in
       suspected intimidation and extortion. FSU members have both been convicted of
       and suspected of numerous aggravated assaults in the Portland area over the past
       several years. FSU is also a known support group for the Outlaws motorcycle club,
       a known organized criminal entity].

               E.       Officer Rooney wrote that Portland Police Evidence technician
       Christopher Stearns responded and took photographs of the damage. E/T Stearns was
       not able to find the discharged bullet. Attempts to reach Poulos in his apartment were
       unsuccessful.

               F.      On 04/05[/]07, I spoke with MDEA SS/A Scott Pelletier. SS/A
       Pelletier told me that he had spoken to a source of information (hereafter referred to as
       a SOI) and the SOI told him the following, in substance: The SOI [Note: SS/A
       Pelletier told me that the SOI has provided reliable and accurate information
       leading to the seizure of drugs during an ongoing investigation] told SS/A Pelletier
       on 04/05/07 that IT had heard that Christopher Poulos had fired a machine gun through
       his bedroom ceiling in the past few days. The SOI told SS/A Pelletier that Poulos
       thought the bullet had entered the apartment above him.

               G.       On 04/06/07, I spoke with a source of information (hereafter referred to
       as SOI 2). SOI 2 has provided me with reliable information in the past that has led to
       the seizure of drugs during an ongoing investigation. SOI 2 told me that Poulos told IT
       that he shot a machine gun in his apartment and was surprised that the Police had not
       shown up as he observed that the bullet went through his bedroom ceiling, into the
       apartment above him.

               H.      On 04/09/07, I spoke with Portland Police Evidence Technician
       Christopher Stearns and he told me that based on his training, education, and
       experience, a high velocity bullet caused the holes. He also told me that he used a
       trajectory rod and was able to align the holes and determine the bullet had originated
       from below the kitchen floor.

               I.      On 04/09/07, I spoke with MDEA SS/A Scott Pelletier and he told me
       that at 1335 hours, on 04/09/07, MDEA S/A’s Jeffrey Calloway and Patrick Lally
       made contact with Poulos as he arrived at his apartment. He has not given consent for
       a search to his apartment as of this time.

Id. at [3]-[4]. In a different section of his Affidavit (section V(A)) Cashman added, inter alia, that

based on his experience, education, training and/or study and the known facts of the investigation, he

knew that:


                                                  4
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 5 of 21                        PageID #: 101



       It is . . . common for those involved in the illegal trafficking/furnishing of scheduled
       drugs to possess, carry, maintain, and keep with, near and by them, in vehicles, and/or
       at the site(s) of drug operations or their residences firearms, ammunition and/or other
       dangerous devices . . . for the purpose of defending, guarding, and protecting their
       drugs, drug proceeds, drug operations, drug records and/or themselves.

Id. at [5]. Cashman included nothing in the Affidavit regarding the controlled drug purchases or the

defendant’s alleged placement of a handgun in a ceiling tile. He excluded reference to the drug

purchases because the investigation was still ongoing and he did not want to reveal the name of the CI,

which he felt might jeopardize that individual’s safety given the defendant’s affiliation with a street

gang some of whose members had been convicted of, or suspected of, assault and other violent crimes.

He was aware that court documents can be sealed but not that they can be sealed from the beginning of

a case, before return of a search warrant. Of course, sealed court documents can be ordered unsealed,

a decision over which Cashman has no control.

       Cashman began drafting the Affidavit and proposed Warrant at the Portland MDEA office at

about noon on April 9, 2007. At some point during the drafting process, he learned from Calloway

that the defendant had stopped by his Coyle Street apartment. Either then or later that day, Calloway

told Cashman that the defendant had told him he no longer had the gun.

       Cashman finished his draft by about 2 p.m. Consistent with his usual practice, he ran it by his

supervisor and an assistant attorney general. He followed suggestions of the assistant attorney general

that he incorporate more detail from the Portland Police Department report and that he speak directly

to Stearns, the evidence technician. After revising and finalizing his Affidavit, he departed for the

Maine District Court building in Portland, arriving there between 2:30 and 2:40 p.m.

         At the courthouse, Cashman typically makes contact with a court officer, who escorts him to

the judges’ waiting area and informs an administrative assistant that he is looking to have a judge

review a search-warrant application. A judge then typically reviews his papers and either comes out

                                                  5
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 6 of 21                         PageID #: 102



to see him or calls him in. Cashman does not go through a warrant application page by page with a

judge but, rather, answers any questions the judge might have. He swears to the truth of his affidavit

and signs it in front of the judge.

        Cashman does not recall whether, when he presented the instant application at the Maine

District Court building, a judge was available immediately. He met with Maine District Court Judge

Paul Eggert at about 3 p.m., and Judge Eggert signed the Warrant at that time. Before doing so, Judge

Eggert pointed out that Cashman had neglected to put his name on the front page of the Warrant.

Cashman handwrote in his name, and both he and Judge Eggert initialed the change. See Warrant at 1.

Cashman does not know how much time Judge Eggert spent reviewing the papers.

        Cashman now is aware that the Affidavit and proposed Warrant contain several errors in

addition to that caught by Judge Eggert:

        1.      In section II(B) of his Affidavit, and in paragraph B of the proposed Warrant, he should

have deleted reference to “evidence of the offenses of possession, furnishing, and/or trafficking

scheduled drugs” and substituted “evidence of the offense of reckless conduct.” See Affidavit at [2];

Warrant at 2.

        2.      In section III(C) of his Affidavit, he should not have included the parenthetical

expression “(basement apartment)” to describe the Marshes’ apartment, which is upstairs from the

defendant’s basement apartment. See Affidavit at [3].

        3.      He should not have included Section V(A) of his Affidavit, detailing his knowledge of

drug dealers’ common practice of keeping firearms and other weapons, which is irrelevant to the

reckless-conduct charge. See id. at [5].

        Cashman, an MDEA agent, typically seeks warrants involving crimes of drug trafficking. In

drafting the instant proposed Warrant and Affidavit, he modified a template he uses to seek search

                                                   6
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 7 of 21                                                PageID #: 103



warrants involving drug-trafficking crimes. In so doing, he neglected to delete or modify all irrelevant

portions of his boilerplate language. Despite the errors, Cashman understood that the Warrant

authorized a search for evidence of the crime of reckless conduct, as is reflected in the section of his

Affidavit titled “Reason for Seizure.” He understood, despite the mistaken references to drug-

trafficking crimes, that the Affidavit did not establish probable cause to search for evidence of the

crime of drug trafficking and that the Warrant did not authorize such a search.

          After making copies of the signed Warrant and Affidavit, Cashman proceeded to the

defendant’s apartment. There he met with his supervisor, Pelletier, as well as fellow agents Lally,

Calloway and Scott Durst.2 A briefing was held to confirm that the Warrant had been signed and that it

authorized a search for evidence of the crime of reckless conduct. Copies of the signed Warrant and

Affidavit were available at the defendant’s apartment. At approximately 3:20 p.m., following the

briefing, agents commenced their search. The defendant’s apartment is relatively small, consisting of

a small closet, a bedroom, a kitchen/living-room area, a bathroom and, across from the exterior

entryway to the apartment, a small storage area. Pelletier searched for and immediately found a bullet

hole in the defendant’s bedroom ceiling. Cashman found a ladder and used it to begin peering above

the ceiling tiles in search of the handgun the CI had described having seen. He recovered a Ruger .357

handgun loaded with rounds of ammunition from above a ceiling tile, a discovery reflected in the

MDEA crime-scene evidence log as Item 1ND [non-drug]. See Joint Exh. 2. In addition, agents

seized the following items during the search: (i) Item 2ND, ammunition (various .357 rounds and one

.22 round), from a kitchen cabinet; (ii) Item 3ND, eighteen shotgun shells, from a kitchen cabinet; (iii)

Item 4ND, a savings deposit book and an electric bill, from a kitchen cabinet, (iv) Item 5ND, a


2
 Cashman did not recall whether an evidence technician was then present. Nothing turns on the point at which the evidence technician
(continued on next page)

                                                                 7
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 8 of 21                         PageID #: 104



handwritten note, from the bar area of the counter, (v) Item 6ND, a handgun holster, from the bedroom,

(vi) Item 7D [drug], suspected Psilocybin (or mushrooms), from the bottom of a kitchen garbage can,

(vii) Item 8ND, an Arm and Hammer box containing a suspected bullet hole, from the bottom of a

kitchen garbage can, (viii) Item 9ND, the top of a digital scale, from a kitchen drawer, (ix) Item 10ND,

the top of a grinder and a tinfoil FSU sign, from the kitchen, (x) Item 11ND, a shoebox containing

numerous baggies, two digital scales, a grinder and two Inositol bottles, from the storage area, and (xi)

Item 12ND, an empty Inositol bottle, from the bedroom. See, e.g., id; Gov’t Exhs. 1-15. The

suspected Psilocybin and the Arm and Hammer box were not visible upon peering into the kitchen

trash can; agents had to hunt through the can to find them. The shoebox seized from the storage area

was covered by a lid, which agents had to remove to ascertain its contents. Kitchen drawers or

cabinets from which various items were seized were closed upon agents’ entry into the apartment.

         Psilocybin is a controlled substance. In Cashman’s estimation, the quantity found was

distribution-level rather than personal-use level. In Cashman’s experience, digital scales are used by

drug traffickers to weigh their wares prior to sale, and grinders are used by drug traffickers to

combine powdered cocaine with a cutting agent, Inositol, which has a similar texture and color as

cocaine. By combining cocaine with a cutting agent, a drug trafficker can increase the volume of his

wares, and hence his or her profits, without actually increasing the amount of the drug.

         Cashman is not an expert in bullets and does not know whether high-velocity bullets can be

fired only from high-velocity weapons. The bullet fired through the ceiling into the upstairs apartment

was never recovered. Cashman does not agree with the proposition that a handgun is not a high-

velocity weapon. He cannot tell by looking at the Ruger whether that gun caused the bullet hole agents

____________________________
arrived at the defendant’s apartment.


                                                   8
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 9 of 21                         PageID #: 105



were investigating.

                                            II. Discussion

         In his motion, the defendant argues that:

         1.      The Warrant’s description of items to be seized is overly broad inasmuch as probable

cause was established only for search for a high-velocity weapon, casing(s), gunshot residue and

damage to the bedroom ceiling. See Motion at 9.

         2.      By the time the Warrant was obtained, authorities were aware it was stale inasmuch as

they knew the gun had been discharged at least five days prior thereto and had been told by the

defendant that he no longer had the gun. See id. at 9 n.2.

         3.      The inventory of items seized was defective inasmuch as it did not contain all items

seized and was not verified as required by Maine Rule of Criminal Procedure 41(d). See id. at 9-10.

         4.      The Ruger handgun and holster were not evidence of any criminal conduct and were

improperly seized under any analysis. See id. at 10.

         5.      Identity evidence (Items 4ND and 5ND) must be suppressed inasmuch as the Warrant

sought identity items related to crimes of drug trafficking but did not establish probable cause to

believe drug trafficking had occurred. See id. at 10-11.

         6.      Inasmuch as the Affidavit did not establish probable cause to believe the defendant had

been engaged in drug trafficking, all drug-trafficking evidence seized by agents must be suppressed.

See id. at 11.

         7.      Statements given before and after Miranda warnings should be suppressed. See id. at

11-12.

         At hearing, defense counsel confirmed – as the government had represented in its brief, see

Government’s Objection to Defendant’s Motion To Suppress Evidence, etc. (“Response”) (Docket

                                                     9
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 10 of 21                          PageID #: 106



No. 30) at 7 n.10 – that he has withdrawn his argument concerning the making of a defective inventory.

 Counsel for the government also reiterated, as stated in the government’s brief, see id. at 1 n.1, that

the government does not intend to introduce in its case-in-chief any statements made by the defendant

to police on April 9, 2007, thereby mooting the defendant’s challenge to the admission of statements.

        With respect to the defendant’s remaining points, the government rejoins that (i) while the

Warrant mistakenly includes references to the crime of drug trafficking, those mistakes are not fatal to

its validity; (ii) there is no staleness problem; (iii) the Warrant’s description of items to be seized is

not overly broad, and the Ruger handgun, holster and ammunition properly were seized pursuant

thereto, (iv) evidence of the crime of drug trafficking properly was seized pursuant to the plain-view

exception to the warrant requirement, as was the Ruger handgun, assuming arguendo that it was not

properly seized pursuant to the Warrant itself, and, (v) even assuming arguendo that the Warrant was

overly broad or lacking in probable cause, agents acted in good faith, rendering suppression

inappropriate pursuant to United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984). See id. at 6-16. In his papers

and at hearing, defense counsel countered that as many as three of four exclusions to the Leon

exception apply. See, e.g., Defendant’s Reply to the Government’s Objection to Defendant’s Motion

To Suppress Evidence (“Reply”) (Docket No. 33) at 3-4.

        A defendant bears the burden of proving the illegality of a warrant; if he succeeds, the burden

shifts to the government to prove entitlement to the Leon good-faith exception. See, e.g., United States

v. Longmire, 761 F.2d 411, 417 (7th Cir.1985) (“The general federal rule on who bears the burden of

proof with respect to an allegedly illegal search or seizure is based upon the warrant-no warrant

dichotomy: If the search or seizure was effected pursuant to a warrant, the defendant bears the burden

of proving its illegality; if the police acted without a warrant, the prosecution bears the burden of

establishing legality.”); see also, e.g., United States v. Koerth, 312 F.3d 862, 868 (7th Cir. 2002) (“If

                                                   10
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 11 of 21                         PageID #: 107



a defendant is successful in establishing the invalidity of the search warrant, the burden then shifts to

the Government to establish that the police relied in good faith on the judge’s decision to accept the

affidavit and issue the warrant.”).

        “[P]olice officers may seize an object in ‘plain view’ without a warrant if they have probable

cause to believe it is contraband without conducting some further search of the object, i.e., if its

incriminating character is immediately apparent.” United States v. Schiavo, 29 F.3d 6, 9 (1st Cir.

1994) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The government bears the burden of proving

entitlement to the plain-view exception to the warrant requirement. See, e.g., United States v.

Ribeiro, 397 F.3d 43, 53 & n.8 (1st Cir. 2005).

         For the reasons that follow, I conclude that (i) the defendant fails to carry his burden of

proving the invalidity of the Warrant, (ii) in any event, assuming arguendo that the Warrant is in some

respects invalid, the government carries its burden of proving applicability of the Leon good-faith

exception, (iii) the defendant falls short of demonstrating that any exclusion to the Leon exception

applies, and (iv) to the extent the police seized items beyond the scope of the Warrant, the government

meets its burden of showing that those items lawfully were seized inasmuch as they were in plain

view.

                              A. Warrant Particularity Requirement

        The defendant’s first point implicates the command of the Fourth Amendment that “no warrants

shall issue, but upon probable cause, and particularly describing the place to be searched.” United

States v. Bonner, 808 F.2d 864, 866 (1st Cir. 1986) (citation and internal punctuation omitted). The

“manifest purpose” of this particularity requirement “is to prevent wide-ranging general searches by

the police.” Id. The defendant relies heavily on United States v. Roche, 614 F.2d 6 (1st Cir. 1980),

in which the First Circuit held overbroad a warrant authorizing seizure of all of an insurer’s

                                                   11
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 12 of 21                       PageID #: 108



documents for evidence of violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1341 when the police had established probable

cause only to believe that the crime had been committed with respect to automobile insurance. See

Motion at 6-9; Roche, 614 F.2d at 7 (“Here, the government could have limited the objects of search

and seizure to documents and records pertaining to automobile insurance, but declined to do so. This

impermissibly broadened the scope of the search beyond the foundation of probable cause.”)

(footnotes omitted).

       The defendant posits that the instant Warrant authorized precisely the type of wide-ranging

general rummaging the particularity requirement is designed to guard against inasmuch as it permitted

search for a wide variety of weapons and drug-trafficking evidence when the accompanying Affidavit

established probable cause to search only for a machine gun or similar high-velocity weapon,

casing(s), gunshot residue and damage to the bedroom ceiling. See Motion at 7-9. In such

circumstances, defense counsel argued at hearing, the appropriate remedy is blanket suppression of all

evidence seized pursuant to the warrant – a proposition for which he cited United States v.

Fitzgerald, 724 F.2d 633 (8th Cir. 1983), and 12A Federal Procedure: Lawyers’ Edition § 33:697.

He contended that, alternatively, the court should grant partial suppression on particularity grounds,

banning the introduction of evidence seized on April 9, 2007 that does not fall within the confines of

the Warrant as he posits it should have been tailored, including the Ruger handgun and all drug-related

evidence seized from the defendant’s apartment.

       As a threshold matter, insofar as appears from my research, the First Circuit has declined to

embrace blanket suppression as a remedy in cases in which a warrant is partially valid. See, e.g.,

United States v. Falon, 959 F.2d 1143, 1149 (1st Cir. 1992) (“The remedy in the case of a seizure

that casts its net too broadly is, as we held in United States v. Riggs, 690 F.2d 298, 300 (1st Cir.



                                                  12
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 13 of 21                         PageID #: 109



1982), not blanket suppression but partial suppression.”). In any event, on the record made in this

case, even partial suppression is unwarranted.

        The defendant’s characterization of the Warrant is itself overbroad. Most notably, the Warrant

does not authorize search for evidence of the crime of drug trafficking. See Warrant at 2. Rather, it

authorizes search for only two categories of evidence: (i) weapons and (ii) identity evidence. See id.

As counsel for the government underscored at hearing, the crime of drug trafficking is mentioned only

in connection with authorization to search for identity evidence, i.e., “[e]vidence demonstrating

identity, possession, dominion, custody or control by any and all individuals over/in the premises to

be searched[,]” including fingerprints, hairs, fibers and documents. Id.

        With respect to the first category of items to be searched – the weapons category – the

defendant falls short of establishing that the Warrant is overbroad insofar as it authorizes a search for

firearms-related evidence. See id. The bullet that penetrated the defendant’s ceiling and entered his

neighbors’ apartment was never recovered. While the Affidavit represented that Stearns, the evidence

technician, had established that the bullet hole was caused by a high-velocity bullet, the Affidavit did

not represent that such a bullet can be fired only from a machine gun or similar weapon. Nor did the

defendant adduce any evidence at hearing suggesting that (i) that is in fact the case, (ii) Cashman knew

it to be the case, or (iii) any reasonable law-enforcement officer would have known it to be the case.

        The defendant makes much of the fact that the Affidavit also relayed that two confidential

informants, who had provided reliable information in the past, had reported that the defendant told

them he had fired a machine gun from his apartment. See Motion at 8; Reply at 2. Nonetheless, even

if, as the Affidavit suggests, the informants accurately relayed the substance of their conversation with

the defendant, their reports do not definitively establish that the offending weapon was a machine gun.

 The Affidavit provided no indication that (i) either informant had seen a machine gun in the

                                                   13
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 14 of 21                                                  PageID #: 110



defendant’s possession or in his apartment, (ii) the defendant necessarily told the informants the truth

about the nature of the weapon fired, or (iii) the police were able to confirm following investigation

that the weapon was a machine gun. In the circumstances, and in the absence of any evidence tending

to show that officers could or should have differentiated among firearms capable of firing a high-

velocity bullet, the Warrant permissibly authorized a search, inter alia, for firearms and ammunition

(such as Items 1ND, 2ND and 3ND). See, e.g., United States v. Morris, 977 F.2d 677, 681 (1st Cir.

1992) (“General descriptions in warrants . . . have been accepted when the surrounding circumstances

render it reasonable.”); United States v. Fuccillo, 808 F.2d 173, 176 (1st Cir. 1987) (“general

descriptions are permissible only in special contexts in which there [is] substantial evidence to

support the belief that the class of contraband [is] on the premises and in practical terms the goods to

be described [can] not be precisely described.”) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).3

While the holster (Item 6ND) and Arm and Hammer box containing a suspected bullet hole (Item 8ND)

are not among items expressly enumerated in the weapons category of the Warrant, authority to search

is “not limited to” the enumerated items. See Warrant at 2. Officers permissibly seized the holster as

evidence linking the defendant to a firearm from which the bullet might have been fired and the Arm

and Hammer box as evidence tending to incriminate the defendant with respect to the crime in

question.

          With respect to the second category of items to be seized – identity evidence – I agree with the

government that it is reasonably clear from examination of the Warrant and Affidavit (which is

attached to and incorporated by reference in the Warrant, see Warrant at 1, and therefore validly may


3
 Even assuming arguendo that, with respect to ammunition, the Warrant should have authorized a search only for high-velocity
ammunition, the defendant adduced no evidence that the ammunition actually seized is not high-velocity ammunition. He thus falls short
of demonstrating a basis for suppression of any of that ammunition.


                                                                 14
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 15 of 21                        PageID #: 111



be taken into account in assessing whether the Warrant is overbroad, see, e.g., Roche, 614 F.2d at 8)

that the language referencing drug trafficking was mistakenly included. The Affidavit makes clear that

the “Reason for Seizure” is to obtain evidence of the crime of reckless conduct; the focus of its

customized facts section is the alleged firearm discharge. See Affidavit at [2]-[4]. What is more, as

the government suggests, see Response at 10, Cashman, who had drafted the proposed Warrant and

Affidavit and understood the Warrant only to authorize search for evidence of the crime of reckless

conduct, was present throughout the search, including during a briefing at which all participating

agents were advised that the Warrant authorized search for evidence of the crime of reckless conduct.

As the government notes, see id., such circumstances militate in favor of a finding that an error is

merely technical, see, e.g., United States v. Bianco, 998 F.2d 1112, 1117 (2d Cir. 1993) (“The

affidavit was present at the time of the search, and spells out quite clearly the nature and purpose of

the proposed search. It explains in detail the motivation behind the search and the nature of the

documents sought. When the warrant and affidavit are read together, there is no ambiguity. Moreover,

although the warrant may not have explicitly incorporated the affidavit, the presence and activity of

agent Hutton, who had read the affidavit and who approved each seizure, satisfies us that the

limitations included in the affidavit were observed.”).

       In any event, it is difficult to see how the mistake in question could have made any difference

in the nature of the ensuing search. The identity-evidence section of the Warrant authorizes search for

documents establishing the identity of the apartment’s occupants/visitors – things such as Item 4ND,

the savings-deposit book and electricity bill, and Item 5ND, the handwritten note. The final clause in

that section of the Warrant merely describes the nature of the crime with respect to which those items

have evidentiary value; it does not transmute the character of the evidence to be sought or seized. See

Warrant at 2.

                                                  15
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 16 of 21                                                 PageID #: 112



          For all of the foregoing reasons, the defendant fails to make a persuasive case that suppression

of any of the firearms-related or identity evidence seized (Items 1ND, 2ND, 3ND, 4ND, 5ND, 6ND

and 8ND) is appropriate on grounds of the asserted overbreadth of the Warrant. 4

                                                 B. Staleness Argument

          The defendant next asserts that by the time the Warrant was obtained, authorities were aware it

was stale because they knew the gun had been discharged at least five days earlier and had been told

by the defendant that he no longer had the gun. See Motion at 9 n.2. This assertion is without merit.

Officers sought a warrant within a day of taking a complaint from the defendant’s upstairs neighbors

that they had discovered what appeared to be a bullet hole in their apartment. That complaint, in turn,

appeared to have been lodged within a matter of a few days of the apparent gun discharge. Cashman,

the only witness at hearing, did not recall whether he learned before or after applying for the Warrant

that the defendant had a conversation with Calloway in which the defendant claimed he no longer had

the gun. In any event, officers were not obliged to take the defendant’s claim at face value, and they

sought other evidence besides the gun – for example, evidence of gunshot residue and damage to the

defendant’s ceiling. In the circumstances, the information possessed by officers was not too stale to

convey probable cause for the search. Compare, e.g., United States v. Bizier, 111 F.3d 214, 219 (1st

Cir. 1997) (“a long delay in seeking a search warrant can create difficulties if the information is

stale”) (emphasis omitted).

                                            C. Leon Good-Faith Exception

          In the event the court should disagree with my conclusion that the defendant falls short of


4
  This analysis is dispositive of the defendant’s fourth and fifth points – that the Ruger handgun and holster were not contraband or
evidence of any criminal conduct and were improperly seized under any analysis, and that documents seized as evidence of possessing,
distributing or trafficking in scheduled drugs (i.e., Items 4ND and 5ND) must be suppressed. See Motion at 9-10. Accordingly, I do
(continued on next page)

                                                                16
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 17 of 21                             PageID #: 113



proving the invalidity of the Warrant, I consider the government’s backstop Leon argument. See

Response at 13-16. Pursuant to Leon, “[e]vidence seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment is

admissible in court if the government placed an objectively reasonable reliance on a neutral and

detached magistrate judge’s incorrect probable cause determination.” United States v. Crosby, 106 F.

Supp.2d 53, 58 (D. Me. 2000), aff’d, 24 Fed. Appx. 7 (1st Cir. 2001) (citation and internal quotation

marks omitted). The Leon exception is itself subject to exceptions:

         There are four exclusions to the Leon good-faith exception: (1) when the magistrate
         was misled by information in an affidavit that the affiant knew was false or would
         have known was false except for his reckless disregard for the truth; (2) where the
         issuing magistrate wholly abandoned his detached and neutral judicial role; (3) where
         the affidavit is so lacking in indicia of probable cause as to render official belief in its
         existence entirely unreasonable; and (4) where a warrant is so facially deficient – i.e.
         in failing to particularize the place to be searched or the things to be seized – that the
         executing officers cannot reasonably presume it to be valid.

United States v. Owens, 167 F.3d 739, 745 (1st Cir. 1999) (citation and internal punctuation omitted).

 The defendant bears the burden of rebutting the government’s good-faith showing by demonstrating

that one or more of the Leon exclusions applies. See, e.g., Koerth, 312 F.3d at 868.

         The government meets its Leon burden, showing that (i) Cashman, who was modifying a

template geared toward drug-trafficking crimes, mistakenly included references relevant to such

crimes (and irrelevant to the crime of reckless conduct) in his Affidavit and proposed Warrant, (ii) as

per his usual practice, Cashman sought review of the Affidavit and proposed Warrant by his

supervisor and an assistant attorney general, neither of whom picked up on the mistakes, and

(iii) Cashman understood the Warrant to authorize only search for evidence of the crime of reckless

conduct.

         At hearing and in his papers, the defendant invoked the first, second and fourth Leon

____________________________
not separately address those points.


                                                     17
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 18 of 21                          PageID #: 114



exclusions, arguing that:

        1.      Given the time sequences and the fact that the issuing judge missed blatant errors in the

Affidavit and proposed Warrant, it can be fairly inferred that he simply rubber-stamped the Warrant.

        2.      The agent should have known it was an invalid warrant because indeed it was, and he

acknowledges that.

        3.      Cashman omitted to include in the Affidavit information known to him.

        The defendant fails to make a persuasive case as to any of these points. Defense counsel

argued at hearing that the court should find, as a factual matter, that Judge Eggert signed the Warrant at

approximately the same time as he first saw the papers (at about 3 p.m.). However, Cashman’s

testimony was that he arrived at the courthouse twenty to thirty minutes prior to the time Judge Eggert

signed the Warrant. Although Cashman did not remember precisely what happened in that instance, he

testified that he typically hands his papers to a court officer, who provides them to a judge for review,

and that the judge meets with him afterward (after having had an opportunity to review the papers). In

the circumstances, I am unwilling to infer that the judge failed to scrutinize these papers. Further,

while the judge did not detect the mistaken reference to the crime of drug trafficking, he did pick up on

an error in the Warrant, the omission of Cashman’s name on the front page. I am unpersuaded that the

issuing judge “wholly abandoned his detached and neutral judicial role[.]” Owens, 167 F.3d at 745

(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

        While Cashman acknowledged that the Affidavit and proposed Warrant contained several

mistakes, most of which (including incorporation of irrelevant drug-trafficking language) resulted from

his failure to delete those sections from the boilerplate language he used as a starting point, he never

admitted that the Warrant was invalid. Nor can it be said that it was so facially deficient that

executing officers could not reasonably presume it to be valid. As noted above, the Warrant

                                                   18
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 19 of 21                            PageID #: 115



authorized search for two categories of things: weapons evidence and identity evidence. The

Affidavit provided ample probable cause to believe that evidence of the crime of reckless conduct

would be discovered in the defendant’s apartment. Both categories of evidence listed in the Warrant

were relevant to that crime.

        Finally, the defendant posits that Cashman omitted important information from the Affidavit,

failing to inform the issuing judge of the ongoing drug investigation, including the confidential

informant’s report that the defendant had placed a handgun in a ceiling tile. See, e.g., Reply at 4 n.4.

Nonetheless, the defendant fails to explain how inclusion of that information could have altered the

judge’s analysis. Nor is the materiality of the information, which Cashman omitted for good reason

(concern for the safety of the informant), otherwise apparent. The drug-investigation information was

irrelevant, and the handgun information simply would have added additional heft (although no more

was required) to the probable-cause finding. It therefore is difficult to discern how these omissions

“misled” the issuing judge.

        For these reasons, to the extent the court finds the Warrant to have been invalid, the Leon good-

faith exception applies, and the Motion should be denied to the extent it seeks suppression of items

seized pursuant to the Warrant.

                                       D. Plain-View Doctrine

        A final category remains: drugs or drug-trafficking-related items. The government concedes

that seizure of these items was not authorized by the Warrant but asserts that officers validly seized

them inasmuch as they were in plain view. See Response at 12-13. The governments meets its burden

of proving the validity of their seizure.

        “It has long been settled that objects falling in the plain view of an officer who has a right to be

in the position to have that view are subject to seizure and may be introduced in evidence.” United

                                                    19
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 20 of 21                         PageID #: 116



States v. Meada, 408 F.3d 14, 23 (1st Cir. 2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

“[P]olice officers may seize an object in ‘plain view’ without a warrant if they have probable cause to

believe it is contraband without conducting some further search of the object, i.e., if its incriminating

character is immediately apparent.” Schiavo, 29 F.3d at 9 (citation and internal quotation marks

omitted); see also, e.g., United States v. Friel, 448 F. Supp.2d 222, 227 (D. Me. 2006) (“[O]nce law

enforcement reached the head of defendant’s bed pursuant to a search warrant that included the entire

residence, they were entitled to seize the weapon in ‘plain view,’ because given the defendant’s status

as a felon, it was illegal for him to possess the firearm and, therefore, it was reasonable for them to

believe that the gun was evidence of a crime.”).

        The items in issue are Item 7D, the suspected Psilocybin (or mushrooms) seized from the

bottom of a kitchen garbage can; Item 9ND, the top of a digital scale, seized from a kitchen drawer;

Item 10ND, the top of a grinder, seized from the kitchen; Item 11ND, a shoebox containing numerous

baggies, two digital scales, a grinder and two Inositol bottles, seized from the storage area; and Item

12ND, an empty Inositol bottle, seized from the bedroom. See, e.g., Joint Exh. 2.

        Officers had a right to be in the position to have a view of each of those items. The Warrant

authorized search not only for firearms but also for much smaller items such as bullet casings and

ammunition. Officers legitimately searched through the contents of the kitchen garbage can, opened

drawers and cabinets and removed the lid from the shoebox found in the storage room in search of the

authorized items. The incriminating character of the drug-related items seized was immediately

apparent to Cashman, a trained MDEA agent, and presumably to his MDEA colleagues assisting in the

search. He recognized the bagged mushrooms as Psilocybin, a controlled substance, and recognized

the digital scales, grinder, baggies and Inositol bottles as items commonly used in the drug-trafficking

trade in general or in aid of cocaine trafficking specifically. Those items accordingly were validly

                                                   20
Case 2:07-cr-00099-GZS Document 43 Filed 01/25/08 Page 21 of 21                       PageID #: 117



seized pursuant to the plain-view exception to the warrant requirement.

                                          III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that the proposed findings of fact herein be adopted

and that the Motion be DENIED.


                                               NOTICE

        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum,
within ten (10) days after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum shall be
filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review by
the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 25th day of January, 2008.


                                                      /s/ David M. Cohen
                                                      David M. Cohen
                                                      United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 21
