     Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 1 of 6



                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                 FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

MARKENO WALTER,                  )
 Petitioner                      )
                                 )
            v.                   )    06-CV-30188-MAP
                                 )    03-CR-30028-MAP
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,        )
 Respondent                      )


                 MEMORANDUM AND ORDER REGARDING
             PETITIONER’S AMENDED MOTION TO VACATE,
                 SET ASIDE, OR CORRECT SENTENCE
                          (Dkt. No. 13)

                         October 15, 2008
PONSOR, D.J.

    Petitioner was charged on a five-count indictment with

possession of a firearm by a previously convicted felon,

possession of ammunition by a previously convicted felon,

possession of a firearm with an obliterated serial number (all
occurring on June 28, 2002), and possession of a firearm and

ammunition by a previously convicted felon (occurring on July

11, 2002).       His first trial ended in a hung jury and a

mistrial.
    Following a second trial, Petitioner was found guilty on

all five counts, and on May 27, 2004 he received a sentence of

188 months.      This sentence was subsequently revised down to
180 months following a remand based upon new Supreme Court

decisional law relating to the Sentencing Guidelines.

    Petitioner initially claimed ineffective assistance of
     Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 2 of 6



counsel based partly upon the failure of his trial attorney to
attempt to vacate the prerequisite state court convictions

that formed the basis for his fifteen-year mandatory sentence.
While this petition has been pending, however, attempts to
vacate the state court convictions have proved unsuccessful;

counsel has therefore dropped that aspect of the petition.
    Petitioner now concentrates solely on the argument that
his attorney at trial was ineffective because he failed to

seek a limiting instruction with regard to certain taped

statements made by a non-testifying government informant.

    In    order   to   assess   this   sole   remaining    claim,     some
background is necessary.         The two purchases that led to

Petitioner’s conviction were choreographed by an F.B.I. agent

using a civilian confidential informant, Terry Brown, who was
Petitioner’s cousin.      At the first trial, which ended in the

hung jury, both Brown and Petitioner testified.               Following

that trial, however, Brown was convicted of sexual misconduct
with minors and, perhaps because of this, his testimony was

not offered in person at the second trial.                Instead, the
government offered the taped conversations between Brown and

Petitioner for the non-hearsay purpose of providing context
for Petitioner’s numerous inculpatory statements. This use of
Brown’s statements to provide context was upheld by the First

Circuit   on direct appeal. U.S. v. Walter, 434 F.3d 30, 34-35


                                   2
        Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 3 of 6



(1st Cir. 2006).          The nub of Petitioner’s argument here,
however, is that his trial attorney’s representation was

constitutionally       deficient because he did not ask for a
limiting instruction to the jury to the effect that these
contextual statements could not be accepted for their truth.1

    Following         submission     of       this       motion     to   vacate,
Petitioner’s trial attorney submitted an affidavit stating

that, in his opinion, his failure to request a limiting
instruction with regard to Brown’s statement being offered

purely as context constituted a mistake, and that he had no

tactical reason for failing to seek the limiting instruction.
    A key feature of Petitioner’s trials, both the initial

one that ended in a hung jury and the second that resulted in

conviction, was that Petitioner never denied selling the

firearms     and   ammunition      offered         by    the    government   into

evidence.       His    defense    was       that    he    was    entrapped   into
committing the crimes.           He argued that the government was
unable to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was either

not induced to make the sales by Brown, or that he had a
predisposition to make the sales.              The difficulty Petitioner

faced in persuading the jury of his argument lay in the

    1
        The court did give this limiting instruction with
regard to certain statements made by Brown outside the
presence of Walter, but defense counsel never asked for a
limiting instruction relating to the statements used as
context for Petitioner’s remarks.
                                        3
      Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 4 of 6



numerous   statements     of   Petitioner     himself,    both    at    his
original trial (when he did testify), and at his second trial

(when he did not testify), when the jury heard the numerous
taped remarks made to him by Brown during the sales.
      The Supreme Court has made it clear that in order to

obtain relief based on a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, a petitioner must show, first, “that counsel made
errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the

‘counsel’ guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment.”

Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984).
      Second, Petitioner must demonstrate prejudice by showing

“that counsel’s errors were so serious as to deprive the
defendant of a fair trial, a trial whose result is reliable.”

Id.

      In this case, it is not necessary to address the first
aspect of Petitioner’s burden. The court will assume that the

failure to request the limiting instruction as to Brown’s

contextual statements did constitute an error sufficiently

egregious to satisfy the first prong of the Strickland test.
      However, even the most generous review of this record

cannot begin to satisfy the second aspect of Strickland.                The

comments made by Brown, allowed by the court into evidence as
context,    even     if   mistakenly       accepted      by   the      jury
substantively, were so minor in comparison with the numerous


                                    4
        Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 5 of 6



floridly inculpatory statements made by Petitioner during the
recordings,      that   no    possibility     of   prejudice   existed    at

Petitioner’s trial resulting from his attorney’s deficient
performance.       The jury heard Petitioner commenting at length
to Brown regarding his possession of the two revolvers that

were the subject of the indictment, as well as a .25 caliber
revolver that he kept for himself.                 In these comments, he
explicitly     admitted      purchasing      the   .25   caliber   firearm,

described the features of the .38 caliber firearm, and noted

to Brown his problems with jamming the .25 caliber firearm,

while    audibly    “dry     firing”   the   pistol.      Based    upon   the
numerous comments of Petitioner, no reasonable jury could

avoid the conclusion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he had

a predisposition to commit the crime he was charged with. The
court simply cannot say that trial counsel’s performance,

assuming it was deficient, was so prejudicial as to “undermine

confidence in the outcome of the trial.”             Singleton v. United
States, 26 F.3d 233, 238 (1st Cir. 1994).

    For these reasons, Petitioner’s Motion to Vacate pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. § 2255 is hereby DENIED, and the petition is
hereby ordered DISMISSED.              The clerk is ordered to enter

judgment for Respondent.         This case may now be closed.

    It is So Ordered.




                                       5
Case 3:03-cr-30028-MAP Document 144 Filed 10/15/08 Page 6 of 6



                                   /s/ Michael A. Ponsor
                                   MICHAEL A. PONSOR
                                   U. S. District Judge




                              6
