      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 1 of 10



                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


                              )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA      )
                              )
          v.                  ) CRIMINAL NO. 08-10019-PBS
                              )
OMAR MOHAMED,                 )
               Defendant.     )
                              )


                         MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

                            December 10, 2008

Saris, U.S.D.J.

                              INTRODUCTION

     Defendant Omar Mohamed, charged with being a felon in

possession of a firearm and ammunition, moves to suppress the gun

seized when the police pat-frisked him, claiming he was arrested

without probable cause.     He also seeks to suppress a later

statement to the police on the ground that it was the fruit of an

unlawful arrest.    At the evidentiary hearing on October 23, 2008,

the government introduced the testimony of Boston Police

Patrolman Peter Messina, Sergeant Lucas Taxter, and Detective

Paul Schroeder.    After the hearing and a review of the briefs,

including supplemental memoranda by both parties, the motion is

DENIED.

                            FINDINGS OF FACT

     On October 19, 2007, at approximately 5:45 p.m., Boston

Police Patrolman Peter Messina and Sgt. Lucas Taxter, members of
      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 2 of 10



the Codman Square Safe Street Team, were patrolling in the area

of Codman Square, a high crime area with multiple shootings and

drug dealing.    Patrolman Messina had been on duty in the area on

the previous night when there had been a shooting near the

intersection of Washington Street and Melville Avenue.          Messina

himself had heard the gunshots coming from the area and later

learned that an individual had been shot several times at close

range inside a pizza shop at 530 Washington Street.          As of the

following evening, no one had been apprehended in connection with

the pizza shop shooting.

     At twilight (about 5:45 p.m.) on October 19th, the night in

question, Messina was standing with Sgt. Lucas Taxter, his

supervisor, on Washington Street between Aspinwall Road and

Lyndhurst Street when they heard five consecutive gunshots.            Like

the night before, these shots came from the Washington Street and

Melville Avenue area.    They ran on Washington Street toward the

gunshots.    When Messina arrived at the corner with Dunlap Street,

a car was stopped in the middle of the street.         Messina asked the

individual in the car, “Where did he go?,” and the individual

responded by pointing down Dunlap Street.        Messina then looked

down Dunlap Street and saw an individual running; Messina began

pursuing the runner who was the suspected shooter in a full

sprint.     According to Messina, the suspect was wearing dark

clothing and was a light- skinned black male with a tall, thin


                                   -2-
         Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 3 of 10



build.     Messina believed he had on shorts and a t-shirt.           As the

street curved, Messina lost view of the sprinter.            At the corner

of the street, Messina slowed down and took a right turn on

Whitfield Street.

     Meanwhile, Taxter, running down Washington Street toward the

gunshots, used his portable radio to notify headquarter

operations about the gunshots.         He saw an individual walking out

of the pizza shop; the individual pointed down Dunlap Street.

Taxter then saw a security guard in another shop crouched down in

the doorway with his weapon drawn.          Taxter asked the guard if

anyone was hurt; the guard shook his head “no,” but also pointed

down Dunlap Street.       Taxter then saw Messina running ahead of him

on Dunlap and a man ahead of Messina running as well.             According

to Taxter, the man in front of Messina was wearing a black top

with a hood.      Taxter followed Messina, turned right onto

Whitfield Street, and immediately shouted for Messina to stop.

     On Whitfield Street, a female at a two-family house on the

second floor porch pointed down the driveway of a house at 92

Whitfield Street.       Taxter also saw a man on the same second floor

porch motioning toward that driveway.          The men waited at the top

of the driveway for backup.        Detectives Paul Schroeder and Steven

Beath arrived soon thereafter (within seconds, according to

Messina).




                                      -3-
         Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 4 of 10



     Believing the suspect was in the rear of 92 Whitfield,

Messina and Taxter proceeded down the right side of the driveway

(with the house at 92 Whitfield on their right) with guns drawn.

Schroeder proceeded down the left-hand side of the driveway.

Schroeder, who had his gun out, saw an individual (Defendant)

crouched down, with a cell phone in his hand, looking through the

slats of a banister beneath a back deck.           The defendant was

wearing a black hooded sweatshirt and dark pants.            Schroeder

yelled out, “Boston Police” and “Get on the ground.”             Defendant

dropped the cellphone and immediately lay down on the ground with

his hands out.

     Messina handcuffed and then frisked Defendant.             When he

found a gun, Messina yelled, “He’s got a gun” or “Gun.”

Defendant began flailing; two other officers helped Messina

subdue him and rolled him onto his side, at which point Taxter

removed the gun from the defendant’s pants pocket.            The gun was a

revolver, a .38 caliber.        It smelled as if it had been recently

fired.     The chamber indicated that all five bullets had been

fired.

     Defendant was wearing a black hooded sweatshirt and jeans

and was sweating profusely.        Because Defendant was wearing

different clothing than Messina believed the man he had been

chasing to be wearing, Messina initially put out a message over

the radio that there may be another suspect wearing a t-shirt and


                                      -4-
      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 5 of 10



shorts.   However, Messina testified that, when he later saw

Defendant standing up and observed his body type (body shape,

hair, and complexion), he believed that Defendant was the same

person he had been chasing.     Messina then cancelled the dispatch.

     As Defendant was picked up by the police from the ground, a

bag of drugs (ten rocks of crack cocaine) dropped from his

person.   Defendant, found with both a gun and drugs on his

person, was placed under arrest, taken to the station, and

booked.

                               DISCUSSION

     I find that the police had reasonable suspicion to believe

that Defendant may have been involved in the shooting, and

therefore to briefly stop Defendant to investigate further.            See

generally Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22 (1968) (holding that “a

police officer may in appropriate circumstances and in an

appropriate manner approach a person for purposes of

investigating possibly criminal behavior even though there is no

probable cause to make an arrest”); Flowers v. Fiore, 359 F.3d

24, 29 (1st Cir. 2004) (explaining that the Terry exception

allows officers to “make brief investigative stops and detain

individuals upon reasonable suspicion that they may have

committed, are committing, or are about to commit a crime”).

While there are some discrepancies in the testimony, the factual

scenario is largely straightforward.        The police heard gun shots,


                                   -5-
      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 6 of 10



ran in the direction of the shots, saw a man running, and

subsequently chased him.     Numerous people all pointed out the

direction the suspect was running.       Although the officer briefly

lost sight of the man, people at a nearby house signaled to the

officer by pointing to a nearby driveway.        The suspect was in the

precise location where two people on the second floor deck on the

corner house pointed.    The man was crouching, while on his phone.

The wrinkle is that Messina originally believed that the runner

who was the suspected shooter had on different clothing than the

man behind the house was actually wearing.        Still, in the

totality of the circumstances, the police in hot pursuit had

ample suspicion for a Terry stop.

     Defendant contends that the police officers’ manner of

detention – including ordering Defendant to the ground with guns

drawn, handcuffing him, and pat-frisking him – constitutes a de

facto arrest undertaken without probable cause and thus in

violation of the Fourth Amendment.       The critical question is

whether the coercive actions used by the officers when detaining

Defendant caused the Terry stop to morph into an arrest.           “There

is no litmus-paper test to determine whether a particular

detention goes beyond a Terry stop and amounts to a de facto

arrest.”    Flowers, 359 F.3d at 29 (internal quotation marks

omitted).   While the First Circuit generally employs a

“reasonable man” test when evaluating such situations, it has


                                   -6-
      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 7 of 10



stated that, “borderline case[s] where the detention at issue has

one or two arrest-like features” require a “fact-specific inquiry

into whether the measures used by the police were reasonable in

light of the circumstances that prompted the stop or that

developed during the course of the stop.”        Id. at 29-30; see

Washington v. Lambert, 98 F.3d 1181, 1185 (9th Cir. 1996)

(suggesting that the same police actions can constitute a de

facto arrest in some circumstances but not others), cited with

approval in United States v. Acosta-Colon, 157 F.3d 9, 15 (1st

Cir. 1998).   The inquiring court must consider the totality of

the circumstances.    United States v. Maguire, 359 F.3d 71, 76

(1st Cir. 2004).

     Here, the police did use several “arrest-like” measures when

they detained Defendant in the backyard of 92 Whitfield Street.

The caselaw is clear that none of these actions – ordering

Defendant to the ground with guns drawn, handcuffing him, and

pat-frisking him – automatically transform a Terry stop into a de

facto arrest.   See United States v. Fornia-Castillo, 408 F.3d 52,

64 (1st Cir. 2005) (“[N]either the use of handcuffs nor the

drawing of a weapon necessarily transforms a valid Terry stop

into a de facto arrest.”); Maguire, 359 F.3d at 77-79 (noting

that neither the use or display of a weapon, nor the fact that a

suspect is placed on the ground, nor the use of a pat-frisk

necessarily imply that the scope of a Terry stop was exceeded).


                                   -7-
      Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 8 of 10



Such actions may be taken by officers during an investigative

Terry stop to protect themselves or others “if the circumstances

reasonably warrant such measures.”       Flowers, 359 F.3d 24 at 30

(holding that, when officers had information that a suspect was

armed and a crime of violence may soon occur, their use of

handcuffs did not cause an investigatory stop to cross over into

an arrest).   The government, however, bears the burden of

pointing to specific facts or circumstances which justify the

particular coercive actions taken in the name of officer or

public safety:

           [W]e . . . have required the government to
           point to some specific fact or circumstance
           that could have supported a reasonable belief
           that the use of such restraints was necessary
           to carry out the legitimate purposes of the
           stop without exposing law enforcement
           officers, the public, or the suspect himself
           to an undue risk of harm.

Id. at 30 (internal quotation marks omitted).

     The government has satisfied this obligation.         In the

totality of these circumstances, the police had valid concerns

for their safety during the investigatory stop.         They were

walking down a dark driveway after a man they reasonably believed

had just used a gun.    Drawing one’s gun was a precaution

warranted under these circumstances, as was the decision to

handcuff and pat-frisk the defendant even as he lay on the

ground.   At first, Messina was the only officer touching

Defendant as he lay on the ground; the other officers only


                                   -8-
          Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 9 of 10



intervened when Defendant began struggling and resisting once

Messina discovered a firearm in Defendant’s pocket.              Moreover,

they were in a residential neighborhood with bystanders nearby,

increasing the risk of harm to the public.

      Defendant suggests that the pat-frisk, in particular, was

unnecessary and impermissible, but this position is

unsupportable.       In order to justify a pat-frisk during a Terry

stop, an “officer need not be absolutely certain that the

individual is armed; the issue is whether a reasonably prudent

man in the circumstances would be warranted in the belief that

his safety or that of others was in danger.”            Terry, 392 U.S. at
27.   The facts that no officer testified that they saw a bulge in

Defendant’s pocket and that, at the point the officers initiated

the frisk, Defendant had not made any offensive moves, are simply

not enough to overcome what is clearly a reasonable belief by the

officers that Defendant could have been armed.1

      I conclude that Defendant’s detention was a valid

investigatory stop.        All means (the drawn guns, ordering

Defendant to the ground, handcuffs, and pat-frisk) were, under

these specific circumstances, reasonable to determine whether the

suspect was armed and to counter any threat of physical harm.




      1
      Moreover, Defendant was lying on the ground, a position he
had assumed immediately once the officers arrived and from which
it would be unlikely to detect a bulge in a front pocket.
                                       -9-
Case 1:08-cr-10019-PBS Document 27 Filed 12/10/08 Page 10 of 10



                            ORDER

The motion to suppress is DENIED.



                                     /s/ Patti B. Saris
                                    PATTI B. SARIS
                                    United States District Judge




                             -10-
