Case 2:07-cr-00091-DBH Document 72 Filed 04/07/08 Page 1 of 3        PageID #: 495



                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                             DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA              )
                                      )
                                      )
                                      )
v.                                    )            CRIMINAL NO. 07-91-P-H
                                      )
WILLIAM BATER,                        )
                                      )
                   DEFENDANT          )


            ORDER AFFIRMING THE RECOMMENDED DECISION
                     OF THE MAGISTRATE JUDGE


      Upon de novo review and after oral argument on April 3, 2008, I adopt the

Magistrate Judge’s recommended decision with one exception described below.

      1.    On the motion to dismiss for prejudicial pre-indictment delay, I

emphasize in particular the defendant’s failure to show that the government

delayed intentionally so as to gain a tactical advantage or harass him.

Government agents and prosecutors had no reason to believe that the defendant

would be unable to procure his nephew’s attendance at any trial (given the

previous relationship between the two and the defendant’s previous ability to

locate and produce this nephew), or that delay would make the defendant unable

to do so. But I reject footnote 3. Phone numbers were appropriately redacted in

affidavits for privacy reasons; I also reject the assertion that defense counsel

carefully circumscribed the defendant’s wife’s testimony to avoid revealing whether
Case 2:07-cr-00091-DBH Document 72 Filed 04/07/08 Page 2 of 3         PageID #: 496



she knew where Phillips is; the government was also free to ask the defendant’s

wife, when she testified, if she knew where Phillips is.

      2.     On the motion to suppress, I adopt the Magistrate Judge’s findings as

well, and I agree with his credibility assessments after reading the entire

transcripts and reviewing all the exhibits. Alternatively, the outcome on the

suppression issue would be the same if I accepted the defendant’s testimony that

the gun case was on the floor under the bed, rather than just under the mattress,

and that the defendant did not point it out to the troopers, but that after initially

seeing two BB guns, “Trooper Hainey, who was on the floor on his hands and

knees, looked under the bed again and pulled out Exhibit 4 (which has been

identified a[s] the case which held the firearm seized that day).” Def.’s Objection

to Proposed Findings and Recommended Dec. on Mot. to Suppress and Mot. to

Dismiss 12 (Docket Item 64). It is clear that pursuant to the consent search to

look for Phillips, the trooper was down on his hands and knees in Bater’s

bedroom, and had lifted the spread so that he could look under the entire bed to

see if Phillips might be hiding there. Thus, he would inevitably see the large gun

case and, although I agree with the defendant that he could not have been able to

see the words “GUN GUARD” on the case under the bed, he could certainly

identify it as a gun case. (“I’d consider it a hunting rifle case.” Tr. 21.) Because

Trooper Hainey already knew that the defendant was a convicted felon not

permitted to possess guns, and had already engaged the defendant in

conversation on that score, he then had probable cause to remove the gun case

from under the bed and to open it whether or not the defendant gave permission.

                                                                                   2
Case 2:07-cr-00091-DBH Document 72 Filed 04/07/08 Page 3 of 3        PageID #: 497



I also draw no significance from the Magistrate Judge’s statement that the search

was not “explicitly limited” to a search for Phillips. Whether the consent was

explicit or not, that was the scope of the search, and the search under the bed was

pursuant to that consent.

      The defendant’s motions to dismiss and to suppress are DENIED.

      SO ORDERED.

      DATED THIS 7TH DAY OF APRIL, 2008



                                            /S/D. BROCK HORNBY
                                            D. BROCK HORNBY
                                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                                                                 3
