1
Case 1:05-Cr-10358-PBS Document 59 Filed 02/24/09 Page 1 of 3

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

v. CRIMINAL NO. 05-10353-PBS

ANTONIO SANTOS

ORDER

 

February 24, 2009
Saris, D.J.

After a hearing conducted on February 9 and 10, 2009, with
defendant Antonio Santos present, and having the benefit of the
reports by and testimony of Doctors Mark Cheltenham and Julia
Reade, as well as the report by William J. Ryan, Ph.D., this
Court, with both parties in agreement, believes that a further
mental evaluation is necessary to determine whether defendant
could be or has been restored to competency.

Defendant was first evaluated in June and July 2007 by Dr.
William Ryan, Ph.D. at the Federal Metropolitan Correctional
Center, located in New York, New York, who determined defendant
was not competent to stand trial. Based on Dr. Ryads report,
this Court, with agreement of the parties, found by a
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant was presently
suffering from a mental disease or defect rendering him mentally
incompetent to the extent that he was unable to understand the

nature and consequences of the proceedings against him or to

1 v
Case 1:05-Cr-10358-PBS Document 59 Filed 02/24/09 Page 2 of 3

assist properly in his defense.

By Order of this Court dated September ll, 200?, and
pursuant to lB U.S.C. §4142(d), defendant was committed to the
Federal Medical Center, located in Butner, North Carolina where
he was evaluated by Dr. Mark Cheltenham between October 2007 and
February 2008. Dr. Cheltenham determined that defendant is
competent to stand trial. Thereafter, defense counsel had
defendant evaluated by Dr. Julia Reade, who concluded defendant
suffers from delusional disorder and is not competent to stand
trial. After hearing the conflicting testimony from doctors
Reade and Cheltenham, and reviewing the competency reports
submitted in this matter, this Court believes it necessary to
have an additional restoration of competency evaluation conducted
to assist it in determining defendants competency status.

Accordingly, pursuant to lB U.S.C. §424l(d)(l), defendant
Antonio Santos is ordered committed to the custody of the
Attorney General, who shall hospitalize the defendant for
treatment in a suitable facility for a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed four months, as is necessary to determine whether
there is a substantial probability that in the foreseeable future
the defendant will attain the capacity to permit the proceedings
in this case to go forward. Because defendant has already been
evaluated by MCC New York and FMC Butner, defendant should not be

committed to either of these facilities.

y v
Case 1:05-Cr-10358-PBS Document 59 Filed 02/24/09 Page 3 of 3

Furthermore, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3161(h)(l)(A), an order
of excludable delay for purposes of computing the time within
which the trial of this case must commence is hereby entered,
excluding from such computation all time commencing this date,
and concluding on the date of the hearing that will be conducted
before this Court under 18 U.S.C. §424l(d) to determine whether
the defendants mental condition has not so improved as to permit
proceedings to go forward in this case.

sr THE couRT, {i\

\
. ' l \`
1 .- , Q \__,>ot/L/~_»O
PATT l B . SARI S
United States District Judge

 

