Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 1 of 18                                    PageID #: 845



                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                       DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                              )
                                                      )
         v.                                           )        CR-07-18-B-W
                                                      )
HORACE W. SALLEY III                                  )


                       PARTIAL ORDER ON MOTIONS FOR NEW TRIAL

         Following a three-day jury trial, Horace W. Salley III moved for a new trial, claiming that

the prosecutor violated his Fifth Amendment guarantee against self incrimination by

commenting on his decision not to testify. Although the Court finds that the prosecutor did

inappropriately comment on the Defendant‟s failure to testify, the Court concludes that the

Government established beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecutorial error was harmless,

and that her language affected neither the outcome of the trial, nor the fairness, integrity, or

public reputation of the proceedings.

I.       STATEMENT OF FACTS

         A.       The Government’s Case – A Brief Overview

         On the third day of trial, a jury found Horace W. Salley III guilty of possession of a

firearm by a prohibited person, a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9).1 The Government‟s case

focused on the whereabouts of a Bushmaster Model 17S Bullpup .223 caliber semi-automatic

rifle, tracing it from its purchase at a firearms dealer in New Hampshire to an alleged sale to the

Defendant in central Maine and finally to a bedroom closet in the Defendant‟s home in Smyrna

1
  Mr. Salley did not stipulate to his status as a prohibited person. See Old Chief v. United States, 519 U.S. 172, 174
(1997); United States v. Leahy, 473 F.3d 401, 410 (1st Cir. 2007). Mr. Salley was convicted of assault on July 16,
2003, under a generic misdemeanor assault statute. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 207-A. The Government presented proof that
the assault was a domestic assault fitting within the definition of 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(33)(A). It did so through the
testimony of the victim, Heather Dupont. Whether the Government met its burden on this element of the crime is
not an issue.
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 2 of 18                     PageID #: 846



Mills, Maine. In addition, the Government presented testimony of two witnesses who testified

that they saw the Defendant in possession of a similar rifle in Plymouth, Maine during the late

fall of 2005.

       B.       The Theory of Defense

       Mr. Salley did not testify. His defense consisted largely of the theory that Skyla Salley,

his ex-wife, framed him. He contended that she had come penniless into their relationship, that

he had money, which she coveted, and once she got his money, she aimed to use the criminal

process to get rid of him and, thereby, keep her own children.

                1.     A Complicated Tale

       This complicated tale begins with the complex relationship between Mr. and Ms. Salley,

a relationship that Ms. Salley testified was marked by her love and fear of the Defendant. Mr.

and Ms. Salley began dating in May 2005; Ms. Salley had two children from a prior relationship

and on June 13, 2005, she learned that she was pregnant by Mr. Salley. On October 16, 2005,

the state of Maine Department of Human Services (DHS) removed her children from her home.

Ms. Salley explained that the DHS workers believed Mr. Salley represented a threat to the

children, based on allegations that he had physically abused one of his prior girlfriend‟s children.

Ms. Salley acknowledged that DHS was forcing her, in effect, to choose between her boyfriend

and her two older children. On December 13, 2005, Ms. Salley chose her children. She left Mr.

Salley and checked into a women‟s shelter; on December 16, 2005, she obtained a temporary

protection from abuse order against him.

       After about a week at the shelter, however, Mr. Salley and Ms. Salley reconnected and

she left the shelter to live with him. She admitted that if the DHS workers discovered that she

had moved in with Mr. Salley, it was likely that when the baby was born, DHS would remove



                                                 2
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 3 of 18                   PageID #: 847



the child from her. On December 28, 2005, while the temporary protection from abuse order

was still in effect, Mr. and Ms. Salley were married.

       Two days later, December 30, 2005, both a real estate closing and a protection from

abuse hearing were scheduled. Ms. Salley attended the real estate closing with Mr. Salley, but

not the protection from abuse hearing. The real estate closing involved the sale of Mr. Salley‟s

land in Detroit, Maine; the proceeds of that transaction, $23,000.00 in cash, went solely to Ms.

Salley. Ms. Salley used the proceeds to purchase a Smyrna Mills, Maine residence, the title for

which was placed solely in her name.

       She failed to attend the December 30, 2005 protection from abuse hearing. Instead, she

left with Mr. Salley for New Hampshire where their baby, HS, was born on February 8, 2006.

Ms. Salley conceded that the reason they had gone to New Hampshire to have the baby was to

avoid DHS involvement with the child. After the birth, Mr. and Ms. Salley returned to Maine

and they continued to live in her house in Smyrna Mills until the fall of 2006. During this

interval, Mr. Salley worked and, in fact, sustained a workers‟ compensation injury.

       On November 25, 2006, with Mr. Salley out of the house, Ms. Salley called 9-1-1,

alleging that Mr. Salley had assaulted her and confirming among other things that he had a

firearm. Trooper Carmen Lilley responded to the 9-1-1 call and found Mr. Salley outside the

house. Trooper Lilley immediately placed Mr. Salley in handcuffs for possible domestic assault.

Mr. Salley denied any assault and Trooper Lilley then placed him in his police cruiser. Trooper

Lilley asked Mr. Salley three different times where the gun was and Mr. Salley responded each

time that to his knowledge, there was no gun. Trooper Lilley proceeded inside the Salley

residence and found Ms. Salley in the bedroom. She told Trooper Lilley about domestic issues




                                                3
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 4 of 18                      PageID #: 848



regarding the firearm and said that Mr. Salley had obtained the gun through an ad in Uncle

Henry‟s; she retrieved the weapon from under some clothes in the bedroom closet.2

           Even after Mr. Salley was arrested in late November 2006, this contentious relationship

continued. Ms. Salley initially lived in a shelter and later moved in with Mr. Salley‟s mother.

During this time, Ms. Salley received a message from the defendant through his mother to the

effect that he was unhappy with her, that he wanted her to change her testimony about him, and

that if she did not do so, he would come after her and the baby. Subsequently, the state of Maine

initiated criminal charges against Mr. Salley, based on Ms. Salley‟s allegations of sexual assault

and witness tampering. Around this same period, although the timing is unclear, DHS acted

against Ms. Salley to terminate her parental rights to one of her other children and the result was

that Ms. Salley‟s parental rights to this child were terminated.

           On January 18, 2007, outside a Superior Court hearing on the pending state criminal

charges, Ms. Salley told Rebecca Miller, a victim-witness advocate, that she was recanting her

allegations against him. Ms. Miller immediately called DHS and they acted swiftly to remove

HS from Ms. Salley that same day. They explained that they thought Mr. Salley was going to

get out of jail in the near future and that Mr. and Ms. Salley with their baby represented a flight

risk. DHS did not return HS to Ms. Salley until April 2007.

           On October 16, 2007, about three weeks before the trial in this criminal case, Ms. Salley

was divorced from Mr. Salley. Ms. Salley admitted that if Mr. Salley were released from prison

and returned to live with her, DHS would likely reopen the file and remove HS. In fact, Ms.

Salley is currently pregnant by another man and she acknowledged that if Mr. Salley were to get

out of jail and return to her, she would be at risk of having her new baby removed, after the baby

is born.
2
    Uncle Henry‟s is a regional classified ad magazine.

                                                          4
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 5 of 18                   PageID #: 849



               2.     Mr. Salley’s Interpretation

       Mr. Salley staked a large part of his defense on the premise that Ms. Salley set him up.

He contended that Ms. Salley viewed him as a financial mark. Despite a roiling relationship with

Mr. Salley, including a protection from abuse order that she had obtained just weeks before, she

married Mr. Salley on December 28, 2005, and, two days later, he gave her $23,000.00. She

invested the $23,000.00 in the Smyrna Mills home, placing the deed in her name alone. She had

thus succeeded in extracting Mr. Salley‟s financial resources from him.

       Second, Mr. Salley contends that Ms. Salley was in part motivated by hatred. The

evidence establishes that she had reason to dislike him. She herself acknowledged that he

threatened her and her family and that she was afraid of him. There are currently pending state

charges that Mr. Salley sexually assaulted her.

       To complete this portrait, Mr. Salley added the ongoing DHS investigations. DHS had

directly threatened to remove her children if Ms. Salley continued to have a relationship with Mr.

Salley, and she had temporarily lost two of her own children due to her relationship with him.

She knew that as a felon he could not have a firearm and that if she placed a firearm in his

possession, he would be sent to jail. Mr. Salley argued that Ms. Salley was willing to continue to

allow him to stay at her house in Smyrna Mills because he was providing for her. However, she

lived with the knowledge that if DHS caught her with Mr. Salley, she could lose all her children.

       Pulling this saga together, Mr. Salley contended that when Ms. Salley placed a 9-1-1 call

to the police on November 25, 2006, she intended to solve her problems in one fell swoop:

having secured his assets, she would rid herself of Mr. Salley and her love-hate relationship with

him, retain her children by removing the individual who had sparked DHS to remove her

children previously, and succeed in having the police act as her divorce attorneys by placing him



                                                  5
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 6 of 18                    PageID #: 850



in jail for firearms possession. In sum, Mr. Salley argued that by the time of her testimony in

this trial, pregnant by another man, Ms. Salley had obtained his assets, put him in prison, secured

custody of H.S., and mollified DHS.

       Thus framed, the defense depended upon the jury‟s firm rejection of Ms. Salley‟s

credibility. She was the person who had called 9-1-1 and she did so while Mr. Salley was away

from the home. If she obtained the firearm, secreted it, put it in their bedroom closet while Mr.

Salley was away, and told the police it was his, she would in effect have sprung the trap. Thus,

whether Mr. Salley knew the firearm was in the bedroom closet was essential to the defense and,

correspondingly, to the Government‟s case.

       C.      The Presentation of the Evidence

       The Government called twelve witnesses; Mr. Salley called nine. The Government

called: (1) Heather Dupont, Mr. Salley‟s ex-girlfriend, who confirmed that Mr. Salley had been

convicted of a domestic assault against her; (2) William Steinhagen, the man who sold the

firearm; (3) Brent McSweyn, an ATF agent; (4) a Verizon Wireless employee; (6) a Unicel Cell

Phone Company employee; (7) a vice president for Uncle Henry‟s; (8-9) James and David

Smith, father and son, who testified that they saw the Defendant with the firearm; (10) Carmen

Lilley, a Maine State Trooper; and, (12) Skyla Salley. The defense called: (1-2) two Smyrna

Mills neighbors of the Salleys; (3-5) three caseworkers for DHS; (6) Harrison Cole, who

performed the marriage between Horace and Skyla Salley; (7) a state of Maine victim-witness

advocate; (8) Joseph Headings, who sold the house to Ms. Salley; and, (8) Rebecca Hughes, who

bought the Salley home in Smyrna Mills and had begun to move in before Mr. Salley was

arrested.




                                                6
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 7 of 18                   PageID #: 851



       The significance of the testimony of Rebecca Hughes bears explanation. Ms. Hughes

testified that she purchased the Salley residence in Smyrna Mills and that she began to move in

on November 11, 2006. Tr. 382:22-25. She testified that with the assistance of Travis Brooks

and Karl Knight, she boxed up some personal belongings and put them in the residence. Tr.

383:3-19. Ms. Hughes‟ activity took place before November 25, 2006, when Mr. Salley was

arrested, leaving at least the implication that Ms. Hughes herself, one of her friends, or someone

else with access to the Salley residence left the firearm there.

       D.      The Prosecutor’s Closing Argument

       During her Closing, the prosecutor focused on this critical question: did Mr. Salley know

that the firearm was in his bedroom closet:

       The bottom line is the gun that Mr. Steinhagen bought in New Hampshire was
       recovered from the defendant‟s bedroom on the date alleged in the indictment.
       There‟s been no suggestion that it was planted there. There‟s been no suggestion
       that Mr. Salley didn‟t know it was there. And, there‟s been no suggestion that
       that wasn‟t his bedroom. The government suggests that on this evidence that
       you‟ve heard over the last few days you have more than enough to determine
       beyond a reasonable doubt that Horace Salley knowingly possessed this firearm.

Tr. 402:7-13 (emphasis added).

II.    Discussion

       A.      The Prosecutor’s Comment

       The prosecutor‟s comment in the closing argument is problematic.            First, it is an

inaccurate statement of the evidence. Trooper Lilley testified that before he entered the Salley

residence, he asked Mr. Salley three times about a firearm and each time Mr. Salley denied

knowledge of it. Contrary to the prosecutor‟s argument, there had been a suggestion from Mr.

Salley himself, confirmed by the Government‟s own witness, that he was unaware there was a

firearm in the residence.



                                                  7
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 8 of 18                     PageID #: 852



       Second, Mr. Salley maintains that the prosecutor‟s argument improperly implies that he

has a burden of proof to demonstrate that he did not know the gun was there. This is a closer

call. The comment could be viewed as a call for the jury to consider that the Defendant had

failed to rebut the Government‟s proof.

       In response, the Government notes that the Defendant did put on a defense, including a

number of witnesses, and suggested an alternative theory: that Ms. Salley (perhaps in

collaboration with others) had set him up. The Government is correct that “[w]hen a defendant

advances a „theory of the case‟ this opens the door to an appropriate response by the prosecution,

commenting on the „quality of his . . . witnesses or . . . attacking the weak evidentiary foundation

on which the defendant‟s theory of the case rested.” United States v. Roberts, 119 F.3d 1006,

1015 (1st Cir. 1997) (quoting United States v. Savarese, 649 F.2d 83, 87 (1st Cir. 1981)). Thus,

the Government “in its response, has some leeway to comment on the defendant‟s failure to

produce evidence supporting the defendant‟s stated theory.” Id. However, Roberts emphasized

that the door is “not open to the prosecutor‟s using such an occasion to comment, even indirectly,

on the defendant‟s failure to testify.” Id.

       This leads to the final and most serious concern: prosecutorial commentary on the

Defendant‟s failure to take the stand. Based on the evidence at trial, only two people had

personal knowledge about whether Mr. Salley actually knew the firearm was in the residence:

Mr. Salley himself and Ms. Salley. The evidence as to his actual knowledge was contradictory:

in his statements to the Trooper, Mr. Salley denied knowledge; in her testimony, Ms. Salley said

it was his gun and he knew it was there. The only means by which Mr. Salley could have

produced additional evidence that he did not know the gun was in the closet would have been to

take the stand and deny it. He had elected not to do so and to rely on his Fifth Amendment



                                                 8
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 9 of 18                   PageID #: 853



privilege not to testify. The prosecutor owed a duty not to comment or allude to his assertion of

that right.

        The question is whether she did so. Her comment, “[t]here‟s no suggestion that Mr.

Salley did not know it was there,” is troubling in two ways: (1) it is directed to Mr. Salley

himself and, (2) it is directed to Mr. Salley‟s knowledge. This statement went straight to the

Defendant‟s knowledge, an element that the Government is allowed to prove by circumstantial

evidence, but about which the Defendant is uniquely qualified to testify. Assuming that by using

the term “suggestion” the prosecutor was referring to evidence and not to the burden of proof,

the danger becomes more apparent.

        B.     Legal Overview

        The Fifth Amendment‟s guarantee against self incrimination is violated by “any comment

by a prosecutor on a defendant‟s exercise of the right to remain silent . . . .” United States v.

Henderson, 320 F.3d 92, 107 (1st Cir. 2003). In this case, the critical issue is whether the

statement “[t]here‟s been no suggestion that Mr. Salley didn‟t know it was there,” is

prosecutorial commentary on the failure of the defendant to testify. If yes, the comment is “a

constitutional error, and the burden rests with the government to show the error harmless beyond

a reasonable doubt, not with the defendant to show the comment was harmful.” United States v.

Wihbey, 75 F.3d 761, 772 n.6 (1st Cir. 1996). If no, it is a “non-constitutional inappropriate

comment, [and] the burden rests with the defendant to show that the comment was harmful, i.e.,

that under the totality of the circumstances they affected the trial‟s outcome. Id. (citation

omitted). To determine if this comment triggers the protection of the Fifth Amendment, the

Court inquires, “whether, in the circumstances of the particular case, the language used was

manifestly intended or was of such character that the jury would naturally and necessarily take it



                                                9
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 10 of 18                                   PageID #: 854



 to be a comment on the failure of the accused to testify.” United States v. Akinola, 985 F.2d

 1105, 1111 (1st Cir. 1993) (citation omitted). If the comment is considered a reference to the

 failure of the accused to testify, the Court normally reviews such language for harmless error.

 Id. However, if no contemporaneous objection was raised at the time the comment was made,

 the Court reviews for “plain error, i.e., error that is clear and obvious and that was prejudicial to

 the defendant in that it affected the outcome of the District Court proceedings. And, we exercise

 that discretion only if the plain forfeited error seriously affects the fairness, integrity, or public

 reputation of judicial proceedings . . . .” Wihbey, 75 F.3d at 769 (quoting United States v. Olano,

 507 U.S. 725, 732-34 (1993)) (internal punctuation omitted). In this case, the Defense did not

 raise a contemporaneous objection.

         C.       Analysis of the Plain Error Standard

                  1.       Inappropriate Prosecutorial Comment

         The statement “[t]here‟s been no suggestion that Mr. Salley didn‟t know it was there,” is

 effectively a comment on Mr. Salley‟s failure to testify. At oral argument, the prosecutor

 assured the Court that she was not referring to Mr. Salley‟s failure to take the stand. She pointed

 out that the Defendant had elicited testimony that some people had moved items of personal

 property into the Salley home before November 25, 2006. She explained that she was referring,

 among other things, to the failure of the defense to produce any evidence that these people – or

 anyone else – claimed that the firearm was theirs. In effect, she meant to say: None of the

 defense witnesses suggested that Mr. Salley did not know the gun was there.3


 3
  This area is irreducibly tricky for the Government. There is a tension between the right to comment on holes in the
 defense theory and the obligation not to comment either on the failure of the defendant to take the stand or on a
 defense burden of proof. The prosecutor has a much freer hand in discussing the strength of the Government‟s case
 and why it sustained its burden of proof. By contrast, when the prosecutor‟s argument turns to the weaknesses in the
 defendant‟s case, especially when the defendant has not testified, the prosecutor has a compelling obligation to be
 especially clear and careful and must navigate between twin shoals, avoiding any reference to the defendant‟s Fifth
 Amendment privilege and any implication that the defendant bears a burden of proof.

                                                         10
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 11 of 18                                    PageID #: 855



         Unfortunately, that is not what she said. If the prosecutor intended to refer to the defense

 failure to produce witnesses to confirm the gun was theirs, she should have said so. There is no

 context around the comment that reflects she was referring to the people who were moving boxes

 into the Salley home before November 25, 2006; she did not mention by name Rachel Hughes,

 Travis Brooks, or Karl Knight, nor did she refer to unnamed individuals. If the prosecutor had

 intended to argue, consistent with Roberts, that the defense theory of the case was not supported

 by the evidence, again, she should have said so.

         Instead, she made a direct reference to Mr. Salley, not to other witnesses, arguing that

 there is no suggestion that Mr. Salley did not know the gun was there. Particularly in view of

 Mr. Salley‟s earlier denials to the trooper, the Court finds that the prosecutor‟s comment would

 likely have been seen as a reference to his failure to take the stand and confirm under oath that he

 did not possess the requisite degree of knowledge of the firearm‟s presence to sustain a

 conviction.4

         The Court is not required to adopt the most negative interpretation of the prosecutor‟s

 comment. See United States v. Glantz, 810 F.2d 316, 323 (1st Cir. 1987) (quoting Donnelly v.

 DeChristoforo, 416 U.S. 637, 647 (1974) (“Although the prosecutor‟s language obviously was

 susceptible to more problematic interpretations, we find the Supreme Court‟s language . . . to be

 particularly appropriate here: „A court should not lightly infer that a prosecutor intends an

 ambiguous remark to have its most damaging meaning or that a jury, sitting through lengthy

 exhortation, will draw that meaning from the plethora of less damaging interpretations.‟”)). But,

 here, the prosecutor‟s comment was not ambiguous, and there are not a “plethora of less

 4
   In addition, it may be that the comment “impermissibly suggested that [the Defendant] bore the burden of proof.”
 Wihbey, 75 F.3d at 770. But, this is a closer issue and the Court does not resolve that question. At the same time,
 the First Circuit has repeatedly instructed against prosecutorial implications that the defendant bears any burden of
 proof. See id.; United States v. Skandier, 758 F.2d 43, 45-46 (1st Cir. 1985) (holding that a “how-does-counsel-
 explain” argument is a Griffin violation and an impermissible shift of the burden of proof).

                                                         11
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 12 of 18                        PageID #: 856



 damaging interpretations.” Id. In the context of the evidence in the case, the Court reluctantly

 concludes that the prosecutor remarked on Mr. Salley‟s failure to take the stand. The Court

 accepts the prosecutor‟s representation that she did not intend to do so and under Akinola, the

 Court concludes her language was not “manifestly intended” to comment on the exercise of the

 Fifth Amendment privilege. Akinola, 985 F.2d at 1111.

        Nevertheless, the Court also concludes that the comment was “of such character that the

 jury would naturally and necessarily take it to be a comment on the failure of the accused to

 testify.” Id.; compare Wihbey, 75 F.3d at 769 (Finding the prosecutor‟s comment – “There‟s just

 no other explanation except the one that‟s been provided from the witness stand by the eight

 witnesses called by the government” – to effectively be commentary on Wihbey‟s failure to

 testify.), and United States v. Flannery, 451 F.2d 880, 882 (1st Cir. 1971) (finding that the

 prosecutor‟s statement regarding “uncontradicted” government testimony impermissible, when

 “contradiction” would have required defendant to testify), with United States v. Wilkerson, 411

 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2005) (Finding the prosecutor‟s comment – “there‟s no real evidence” that

 defendant did not go up the alley and “pretty much nothing” to say that defendant ran up

 driveway – within the context of trial, to likely refer to “Wilkerson‟s failure to produce other

 evidence supporting his theory of the case. At most, the comments are ambiguous.”), and United

 States v. Babbitt, 683 F.2d 21, 23-24 (1st Cir. 1982) (finding no error in the comment: “While

 you search out the truth you may wish to ask yourself, „Who has appeared before me in the form

 of a witness?‟”).

                2.      The Impact on the Outcome of the Trial

        Despite the prosecutor‟s comment, the Court concludes that her language did not affect

 the outcome of the trial, nor did it seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of



                                                  12
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 13 of 18                  PageID #: 857



 the proceedings. There was a virtual mountain of evidence of Mr. Salley‟s guilt. First, by

 calling the victim, Heather Dupont, the Government established that Mr. Salley had been

 convicted of domestic assault. There is no question but that Mr. Salley was a prohibited person

 under 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9).

        Next, the Government was required to demonstrate that the firearm had been “shipped or

 transported in interstate . . . commerce.” Id. § 922(g). If the Government established that Mr.

 Salley possessed the Bushmaster firearm, the evidence demonstrated that Mr. Steinhagen

 purchased the firearm in New Hampshire, traveled to Maine, and sold it here. This is sufficient

 to satisfy the interstate nexus requirement.

        This leaves as the last question: whether Mr. Salley possessed the firearm that Trooper

 Lilly found in the Salley closet. The Government called Mr. Steinhagen as a witness. Mr.

 Steinhagen, who is resident of New Hampshire, said that he had purchased a Bushmaster

 Bullpup M17S rifle with a specific serial number at Skip‟s Gun Shop in Bristol, New Hampshire.

 He identified the Bushmaster that was found in the Salley residence as the same firearm he

 bought in New Hampshire. After he acquired the Bushmaster, he said that in late 2005, he

 responded to an ad in Uncle Henry‟s that advertised a 1946 Chevy coupe, called the phone

 number in the ad, and spoke to a man. After some discussion, they agreed on a trade: the

 Bushmaster and a four-wheeler for the 1946 Chevy coupe. Mr. Steinhagen drove to central

 Maine, met a man he could not identify, and made the swap.

        The Government introduced into evidence the Uncle Henry‟s ad that drew Mr.

 Steinhagen‟s attention. The ad had Mr. Salley‟s cell phone number as a contact number and the

 Government introduced cell phone records which demonstrated that Mr. Steinhagen called Mr.




                                                13
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 14 of 18                    PageID #: 858



 Salley‟s cell phone not only when he initially made the deal, but as he approached the location in

 central Maine where they had agreed to meet.

        The Government called David and James Smith, residents of Plymouth, Maine, who

 knew Mr. Salley. David Smith testified that Mr. Salley came to their home in the fall of 2005

 during hunting season. He said that Mr. Salley was doing a trade with his father, James Smith,

 that Mr. Salley arrived at the Smith residence, and that he and Mr. Salley each shot the

 Bushmaster rifle in the Smith backyard. James Smith confirmed that he saw Mr. Salley holding

 the gun as he proceeded past the house with David Smith. He said he did not see anyone fire the

 gun, but he heard rapid shots, consistent with a semi-automatic firearm. James Smith also

 testified that Mr. Salley had owned a Chevy coupe, the same type of automobile Mr. Steinhagen

 received in trade.

        Finally, there was the testimony of Skyla Salley.        Ms. Salley knitted together the

 disparate parts of the story. She said that she was present at many critical events: when Mr.

 Salley received the phone call from Mr. Steinhagen, when Mr. Salley made the trade for the rifle,

 when Mr. Salley went to the Smiths‟ residence and shot the gun, and when Mr. Salley brought

 the firearm into their home in Smyrna Mills. She also was the one who made the 9-1-1 call to

 the police and she was present when Trooper Lilly discovered the firearm in the bedroom closet.

        The defense theory that Ms. Salley set up Mr. Salley to extract his money and put him in

 jail to satisfy DHS is not entirely implausible. However, even if Ms. Salley‟s testimony were

 discounted, the collective testimony of William Steinhagen, David Smith, and James Smith still

 places the Bushmaster in Mr. Salley‟s possession. Mr. Steinhagen called Mr. Salley‟s cell phone

 number both to make the deal and as he approached the site of the swap, and the Smiths each

 saw Mr. Salley with the firearm. To accept the defense theory, someone else in cahoots with Ms.



                                                14
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 15 of 18                       PageID #: 859



 Salley gained access to Mr. Salley‟s cell phone and traded a Chevy coupe for a Bushmaster rifle

 in the fall of 2005. Whatever happened to the rifle between the fall of 2005 and November 25,

 2006, it reappeared in the Salley bedroom after Ms. Salley made the 9-1-1 call.

        It would take a giant leap to conclude that Ms. Salley engaged in such a long, complex,

 well-concealed conspiracy to frame her husband. The timing is off. If Ms. Salley (or her

 accomplice) got the firearm in the fall of 2005, there would be no obvious reason she would have

 waited until the fall of 2006 to call the police and turn him in. The intervening events are

 inconsistent. Again, if she had the firearm in the fall of 2005 and wanted to wait to obtain his

 money, she could have accomplished this right after he transferred his money to her on

 December 30, 2005, when she got sole title to the Smyrna Mills house. Further, her post-arrest

 conduct is at odds with the defense theory. She initially said she was recanting her testimony

 against Mr. Salley and later recanted her recantation. The evidence fails to paint the portrait of

 the scheming and manipulative person Mr. Salley‟s theory portrays. Furthermore, there was no

 evidence that anyone – other than her – would have had the motive and opportunity to become

 her accomplice.

        Moreover, none of this explains the testimony of the Smiths, who placed the firearm in

 Mr. Salley‟s hands in the fall of 2005. To accept the defense theory, the Smiths would have had

 to be part of the conspiracy against Mr. Salley and there is no evidence they were.

        Against this cumulative evidence is the single sentence by the prosecutor in the course of

 a closing argument, a sentence that itself requires some parsing to understand its

 inappropriateness, which may explain the Defendant‟s failure to object. Moreover, the Court

 instructed the jury on the Defendant‟s right to not testify and on the Government‟s burden of




                                                 15
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 16 of 18                                        PageID #: 860



 proof.5 The prosecutor‟s isolated comment in the midst of a closing argument was thus mitigated

 by the Court‟s jury instructions. The Court concludes that the Government has established

 beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecutorial error was harmless, and that her language

 affected neither the outcome of the trial, nor the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of the

 proceedings.

          D.       Defendant’s Outburst as Grounds for a New Trial

          On the last day of trial while the jury was in the courtroom, Mr. Salley suddenly stood up

 and exclaimed “I, Horace Salley, have not been adequately represented by Mr. Smith.” Tr.

 370:9-10. Mr. Salley‟s attorney immediately approached sidebar and moved for a mistrial. Tr.


 5
  The relevant portions of the jury instructions are as follows:
                    Constitutional right not to testify. Horace Salley has a constitutional right not to testify,
          and no inference or suggestion of guilt or of anything else may be drawn from the fact that he did
          not testify. For any of you to draw such an inference or suggestion would be wrong; indeed, it
          would be a violation of your oath as a juror.
 Tr. 423:6-11.
                    Presumption of innocence. It is a cardinal principle of our system of justice that every
          person accused of a crime is presumed to be innocent unless and until his guilt is established
          beyond a reasonable doubt. The presumption is not a mere formality. It is a matter of the most
          important substance.
                    The presumption of innocence alone is sufficient to acquit a defendant unless you are
          satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of his guilt after considering all the evidence. The defendant
          before you, Horace Salley, has the benefit of that presumption throughout the trial, and you are not
          to convict the defendant unless you are persuaded of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
                    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt. In a criminal case, the burden is at all times upon the
          government to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The law does not require that the
          government prove guilt beyond all possible doubt. Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is sufficient
          to convict. This burden never shifts to Horace Salley. It is always the government‟s burden to
          prove each of the elements of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt. Mr. Salley has the
          right to rely upon the failure or inability of the government to establish beyond a reasonable doubt
          any essential element of an offense charged against him.
                    Before you may convict Mr. Salley, the government‟s evidence must satisfy you beyond
          a reasonable doubt of his guilt of the particular offense charged. If, after fair and impartial
          consideration of all the evidence, you have a reasonable doubt as to Mr. Salley‟s guilt of the
          charged offense, it is your duty to acquit him. On the other hand, if, after fair and impartial
          consideration of all the evidence, you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of Mr. Salley‟s guilt
          of the charged offense, you should vote to convict him of that offense.
                    A reasonable doubt does not mean a mere possibility that Mr. Salley may not be guilty;
          nor does it mean a fanciful or imaginary doubt, nor one based upon groundless conjecture. It
          means a doubt based on reason. A level of proof that requires you to indulge in conjecture,
          surmise, or suspicion in order to reach a conclusion of guilt does not constitute proof beyond a
          reasonable doubt.
 Tr. 417:17-419:7

                                                            16
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 17 of 18                                   PageID #: 861



 371:15-16. The Court excused the jury. Tr. 371:19-20. There was some confusion about what

 Mr. Salley had actually said and whether the jury had understood it. Tr. 372:10-25; 373:1-6.

 After an extended colloquy with the Defendant, the Court denied the motion for mistrial and

 when the jury was brought back into the courtroom, instructed the jury “to disregard [the

 comment], take it out of your mind, just as if it never happened.” Tr. 381:19-20.

            Mr. Salley now argues that this outburst, “so close to the end of the trial and likewise

 close proximity to the Government‟s contested remarks created a cumulative effect in the final

 critical state of the trial which should require a new trial.” Def.’s Supplemental Mot. for New

 Trial at 1 (Docket # 124). To start, “it is well established that a defendant generally may not

 benefit through his own misconduct.” United States v. Cunningham, 194 Fed. Appx. 582, 585

 (11th Cir. 2006). In Cunningham, the Defendant‟s outburst was severe enough to require the

 courtroom security officers to “activate the stun belt Cunningham was wearing and then “tackle”

 him to the floor . . . .” Id. Despite this series of events, the Court found that “[t]here is no

 indication the jury was prejudiced by Cunningham‟s outburst, or by the subsequent security

 measures taken to subdue him,” and “[e]ven if the jurors were prejudiced by Cunningham‟s

 outburst, the security response to that outburst, and the district court‟s explanation that trial

 delays were caused by Cunningham, he may not require a mistrial through his own misconduct.”

 Id.

            In this case, the Court, when the jury returned, provided an immediate instruction to the

 jury to disregard the comment made by Mr. Salley.6 At the time of the outburst, it was unclear

 what exactly Mr. Salley had said, and there is no indication that the jurors were prejudiced by his

 6
     The Court instructed:
           Ladies and gentlemen, just before you left, the defendant stood up and said something; I'm not sure
           if you understood what he said; I'm not sure if it -- what he said would have any impact on you. But I am
           instructing you now simply to disregard it, take it out of your mind, just as if it never happened.
           Tr. 381:15-20.

                                                          17
Case 1:07-cr-00018-JAW Document 148 Filed 05/12/08 Page 18 of 18                                          PageID #: 862



 statement. As noted by other courts, if a defendant “were allowed to obtain a new trial because

 of his inappropriate outburst, any defendant in the future could sabotage his case and ensure a

 new trial on appeal by engaging in inappropriate or obstreperous conduct.”                                 Williams v.

 Calderon, 48 F. Supp. 2d 979, 1027 (C.D. Cal. 1998); see also United States v. Stewart, 256 F.3d

 231, 242 (4th Cir. 2001) (finding that “granting [the Defendant‟s] mistrial motion on the basis of

 [his] own misconduct would subvert the judicial process and allow [the Defendant] to benefit

 from his own wrongdoing.”); United States v. Harris, 2 F.3d 1452, 1456 (7th Cir. 1993) (holding

 that the defendant was not entitled to a mistrial as the result of his own outburst during trial

 because to grant the mistrial would allow the defendant to profit from his own wrong). Mr.

 Salley‟s outburst is not grounds for a new trial.

 III.     CONCLUSION

          The Court DENIES the Defendant‟s Motion for a New Trial (Docket # 106) and

 DENIES, in part, his Supplemental Motion for a New Trial (Docket # 124).7

          SO ORDERED.


                                                         /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                                         JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE



 Dated this 12th day of May, 2008




 7
  The Court has granted the Defendant‟s oral Motion to Amend his Supplemental Motion for a New Trial (Docket #
 147). This decision, therefore, is a partial resolution of the motion for new trial and leaves for later a final resolution
 of another matter that the parties are in the process of investigating.

                                                            18
