Case 1:08-cr-10llO-WGY Document 21 Filed 03/12/09 Page 1 of 2

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

CRIMINAL ACTION
NO. OS-lOllO#WGY

V .

DAVID ARROYO AVILES

Defendant.

-._,V~._/~.__»`.`_,~_,`.\,

 

MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
YOUNG, D.J. MARCH 12, 2009

Defendant David Arroyo Aviles was charged with several
firearm and controlled substance offenses. He moved to suppress
physical evidence and various statements he made during his
arrest and while in custody, alleging that they were the result
of a violation of his Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendment rights.
The Court held an evidentiary hearing on the motion to suppress
on January 30, 2009 and made its factual findings from the bench.
The parties provided further briefing on the legal issues. After
considering the briefs, the Court hereby rules that all the
evidence is admissible.

Aviles has admitted in his post-hearing memorandum that, if
the “all persons present” clause of the warrant is indeed
unconstitutional, the proper remedy is to sever that paragraph of
the warrant. Def.'s Mem. Supp. at 3 n.4 [Doc. No. 16]. The

remainder of the warrant is still valid. Because the physical

Case 1:08-cr-10110-WGY Document 21 Filed 03/12/09 Page 2 of 2

evidence and Aviles’ statements are admissible even if the “all
persons present” clause was not in the warrant, the Court need
not decide the validity of that clause. The remainder of the
warrant was constitutionally sound, properly executed, and gave
the police the legal authority to search the apartment, which
turned up drugs, cashr and a firearm.

Mr. Aviles' subsequent statements were voluntary and were
made after he was properly Mirandized and understood his rights.
Moreover, the Court rules that Aviles did not assert his Sixth
Amendment rights before his conversation with Agent O’Shea.
Under both the test announced in Blockburger v. United States,
284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932) and the dual sovereignty doctrine, see
United States v. Coker, 433 F.3d 39 (1st Cir. 2005), Aviles'
assertion of his Sixth Amendment right in the state proceedings
does not carry over to the federal proceedings. Before his
conversation with O'Shea, Aviles was properly Mirandized,
understood his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights, and voluntarily

waived them. Accordingly, Aviles' Motion to Suppress is DENIED.

SO ORDERED.

WILLIAM G.
DISTRICT JU E

