 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 1 of 8                     PageID #: 90



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                    )
                                             )
       v.                                    )       Crim. No. 7-86-B-W
                                             )
BONNY L. REYNOLDS,                           )
                                             )
               Defendant.                    )


                                RECOMMENDED DECISION

       This matter is before me on a motion to suppress that was filed on March 12, 2008, and

referred on April 15, 2008. On May 14, 2008, I ordered a psychological evaluation be performed

upon the defendant. On June 30, 2008, I received a report from the evaluator suggesting that Ms.

Reynolds was not currently competent to stand trial because of her inability to properly assist in

the preparation of her defense. On July 10 a hearing on the issue of competence was held before

me and I now recommend that the court find the defendant incompetent to proceed at the present

time and commit her in accordance with the proposed order attached to this recommended

decision.

                                    Background Information

       Bonny Reynolds was charged by indictment returned December 11, 2007, with one count

of possession of firearms after having been committed to a mental institution in violation of 18

U.S.C. § 922(g)(4) and one count of possession of a firearm with an obliterated serial number in

violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(k). The events giving rise to the charges were alleged to have

occurred on or about May 2, 2006. On February 15, 2008, Bonny L. Reynolds was arrested and

appeared before me for an initial appearance on the Government’s motion for detention.
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 2 of 8                     PageID #: 91



Counsel was appointed to represent her and the matter was continued until February 19, 2008,

for a detention hearing and arraignment on the indictment. Reynolds was temporarily detained.

On February 19 I denied the Government’s motion for detention and released Reynolds on

conditions. Following arraignment I entered an order in respect to discovery and set a deadline

for filing of pretrial motions. On February 26, 2008, the Government filed a motion to revoke

pretrial release based upon Reynolds’ failure to report as required. Reynolds was promptly

arrested and appeared before me on February 28, 2008, for a hearing on the motion to revoke.

Following hearing I again released Reynolds on amended conditions of release. During her

appearances before me Ms. Reynolds was somewhat belligerent and agitated, but I had no reason

to question her competence to understand the nature and consequences of the proceedings.

Counsel did not then raise any issue regarding her ability to properly assist in her own defense.

       Pursuant to the pretrial motion deadline, the motion to suppress was filed on March 12,

2008. On April 3, 2008, the Government filed a motion for revocation of order of release and

for detention or modification of conditions of release. That motion was set for hearing in

conjunction with the motion to suppress hearing scheduled for April 29, 2008. Reynolds did not

appear for the hearings. An arrest warrant issued and she was brought before the court in

custody on May 1, 2008. I ordered pretrial release revoked following a hearing and the

defendant has been detained since that date. Her defense counsel requested the motion to

suppress be held in abeyance because he intended to file a motion for a competency evaluation

based upon Reynolds’ most recent conduct. In fact the Government filed such a motion on May

2, 2008. Defense counsel responded on May 13, 2008, requesting that I order the examination be

done locally by an independent psychologist who had experience as a State of Maine forensic

examiner and who had previously performed numerous competency evaluations. I held a



                                                 2
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 3 of 8                      PageID #: 92



conference of counsel on May 14, 2008, and I ordered that a competency evaluation be

performed by Diane A. Tennies, Ph.D., LADC of Bangor, Maine, to be completed and filed with

the court by June 30, 2008.   I ordered the local evaluation in part because of recent cases where

it has taken over three weeks for the Bureau of Prisons to designate a facility and transport a

female prisoner to that facility before the examination could even begin. On June 30, 2008, I

received the report suggesting that Reynolds was not competent to proceed because her mental

illness currently rendered her unable to assist properly in her own defense. A competency

hearing was held on July 10, 2008, with Diane A. Tennies and Bonny L. Reynolds both

presenting testimony.

                                   The Competency Standard

       "[T]he criminal trial of an incompetent defendant violates due process." Medina v.

California, 505 U.S. 437, 453 (1992). This hearing arises under 18 U.S.C. § 4241, which

provides in relevant part:

       At any time after the commencement of a prosecution for an offense and prior to
       the sentencing of the defendant, or at any time after the commencement of
       probation or supervised release and prior to the completion of the sentence, the
       defendant or the attorney for the Government may file a motion for a hearing to
       determine the mental competency of the defendant. The court shall grant the
       motion, or shall order such a hearing on its own motion, if there is reasonable
       cause to believe that the defendant may presently be suffering from a mental
       disease or defect rendering him mentally incompetent to the extent that he is
       unable to understand the nature and consequences of the proceedings against him
       or to assist properly in his defense.

Id. § 4241(a). If, after a hearing, the Court concludes by a preponderance of the evidence that

the defendant is not competent to stand trial, the Court "shall commit the defendant to the

custody of the Attorney General," who "shall hospitalize the defendant for treatment in a suitable

facility." Id. § 4241(d). Thereafter, within a reasonable time not to exceed four months, it must

be addressed whether there is a substantial probability that the defendant will become competent

                                                 3
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 4 of 8                       PageID #: 93



"in the foreseeable future" for purposes of standing trial. Id. Competency consists of a "present

ability to consult with [a] lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding . . . [and] a

rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings.'" Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S.

402, 402 (1960) (per curiam). It is a necessary finding that the defendant have the mental

capacity to consult with counsel to assist in the preparation of a defense. Drope v. Missouri, 420

U.S. 162, 171 (1975). The burden of persuasion by a preponderance of the evidence rests with

the government. United States v. Thomas, 519 F. Supp. 2d 135, 139 (D. Me. 2007) ("Absent

controlling precedent from the Supreme Court and direct guidance from the First Circuit, the

Court concludes that the burden rests on the government to demonstrate that the defendant is

competent.")

                      Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law

       Diane A. Tennies is licensed by the State of Maine as an alcohol and drug counselor and

she also practices forensic and clinical psychology. She has testified in child protective

proceedings and criminal competency hearings in the state courts. Dr. Tennies has performed

over 30 competency evaluations for the State of Maine. Her evaluation of Reynolds was based

upon the data and impressions she acquired during a three and one-half hour interview with

Reynolds at the Two Bridges Regional Jail in Wiscasset, Maine, the information she was able to

obtain from police reports and records, medical records from Acadia Hospital in Bangor, Maine

and, following preparation of the report, medical records subsequently obtained from

Sebasticook Family Practice in Newport, Maine. Tennies also interviewed Viola Hutchins,

Reynolds’ mother, and obtained additional history. However, Tennies admitted that she had no

independent verification of the information provided by Hutchins regarding Reynolds level of

functioning when she was living in the community. Tennies’s report details her conclusions



                                                  4
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 5 of 8                      PageID #: 94



following the mental exam and I incorporate those findings into these proposed findings as

neither party challenged her testimony. A copy of the actual report will be filed separately under

seal.

        During her testimony Dr. Tennies made some additional observations. Even though

Tennies is not a psychiatrist she did offer her opinion that the Acadia diagnosis at the time of

discharge on April 3, 2006, suggesting Bipolar Disorder might be in error and that Reynolds may

suffer from a Schizo-Affective disorder which is much more intractable and difficult to treat with

a medication regime than is a Bipolar Disorder. Tennies also questioned the decision of the

medical staff at the jail who had prescribed rimeron approximately two weeks ago to treat

Reynolds’s increasing depression. Reynolds had requested St. John’s Wort as her treatment of

choice for depression and that was first tried but was unsuccessful in alleviating the increased

symptoms. Tennies found the choice of rimeron “surprising” because it is an antidepressant and

most commonly is prescribed in conjunction with a mood stabilizer when dealing with someone

with a Bipolar Disorder. In any event, based upon my own observations at the hearing, there is

no reason to believe that Reynolds’s condition has improved any from the condition described by

Tennies as of her June 4, 2008, examination. I would not make any findings regarding the

proper diagnosis for Reynolds or the proper medication regime. However, I accept Tennies

testimony that Reynolds needs to have a medical regime that is regularly monitored for

compliance in order to improve her level of functioning. I also agree with Tennies that

Reynolds’s incarceration has not improved her mental health and that she appears less focused

and alert than she did at the earlier hearings.

        The findings regarding Reynolds’s competence to stand trial are very difficult to make

based on this record. Clearly Reynolds understands the nature and consequences of the



                                                  5
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 6 of 8                        PageID #: 95



proceedings. Tennies’s report supports that finding and my own observations corroborate that

Reynolds knows who the principal actors in the courtroom are, how proceedings are conducted,

and what the consequences of these proceedings might be in a general sense. (“I don’t know the

sentencing guidelines except Jeff said if I plead guilty I get up to ten years and if I am found

guilty then I get up to ten years so there is no reason for me to plead guilty and I did not do it. I

was helping people by taking those guns.”) A cognitive ability to understand the essentials of

the criminal justice system certainly exists.

       The problem, in my view, is two-fold. First Reynolds’s period of incarceration with no

medication and/or psychological counseling has caused her mental condition to deteriorate.

According to Viola Hutchins her daughter never spoke about being “gifted” or communicating

with the dead until the current incarceration. This topic has now become a preoccupation with

Reynolds because she testified on the stand that she does communicate with the dead and that

she has a gift of foreseeing when someone important to her might be in danger. It is easy to see

that her preoccupation with the voices she hears and the abuse she believes she is suffering at the

hands of "lesbian guards" in the jail interferes with her ability to assist properly in her own

defense. As Dr. Tennies testified, these preoccupations, which appear to be the product of her

mental illness, interfere with her ability to logically process the information she is given. Thus,

even though Reynolds knows the maximum sentence for this offense is 10 years and that she

could theoretically receive that sentence whether she goes to trial or pleads guilty, her mental

condition prevents her from focusing on the benefits and detriments of pursuing one course of

action over the other. In these circumstances she can’t assist her counsel in the preparation of a

defense. It also seems that she is unable to intelligently relate the events and circumstances of

her arrest and why she found herself to be in possession of the firearms.



                                                  6
 Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 7 of 8                         PageID #: 96



       The second problem presented by this evidence is that Dr. Tennies acknowledged that

some of these characteristics are not only the result of Reynolds’s illness but are also personality

disorders or even personality “features” that are persistent and will make her assistance in

preparation of her defense difficult under the best of circumstances. That fact alone does not

render her incompetent to stand trial. She has a lengthy history of poor decision making,

impulsivity, and paranoid behavior. Even when she was functioning at a reasonable level in the

community she was preoccupied with certain issues, such as her dissatisfaction with having a

designated representative payee instead of receiving her disability payments directly from the

government.

       In this case the Government has not challenged Dr. Tennies’s opinion and does not

attempt to argue, at least at this juncture, that Reynolds has the ability to properly assist in her

defense. I agree with the Government’s assessment, in that based primarily on Reynolds’s own

testimony at the hearing it appears she lacks the capacity to properly assist with her defense.

       According to Reynolds’s mother and the discharge summary from Acadia Hospital,

Reynolds has historically responded very well to psychopharmacological interventions and there

is every reason to believe that if she were to receive the proper care and treatment she could

become competent to assist properly in her defense in relatively short order. It is conceivable

that further psychiatric examination and treatment in a controlled setting may result in other

examiners, including a psychiatrist, concluding that Reynolds does have the capacity to assist in

her defense. It may even develop that a relatively short stay in a medical facility with a

monitored and proper medication regime will result in Reynolds’s condition quickly improving

to the point where she could stand trial. However, at the present time I find that as a result of

mental illness she is unable to properly assist with her defense.



                                                   7
Case 1:07-cr-00086-JAW Document 53 Filed 07/10/08 Page 8 of 8                    PageID #: 97




                                          NOTICE

             A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
    judge's report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
    28 U.S.C. 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
    together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
    district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
    thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
    district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

           Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
    novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court's order.

                                           /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                           U.S. Magistrate Judge
    Date July 10, 2008




                                              8
