Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 1 of 7                 PageID #: 126



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                   )
                                           )
v.                                         )             Criminal No. 07-127-P-H
                                           )
KARL KNIGHT,                               )
                                           )
              Defendant                    )



                RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


       Karl Knight, charged with making a false statement in connection with the attempted

acquisition of a firearm, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(a)(6) and 924(a)(2), Indictment

(Docket No. 1), moves to suppress statements he made during his transport from the Saco, Maine

Police Department to the Cumberland County Jail in Portland, Maine, on January 29, 2008. An

evidentiary hearing was held before me on August 4, 2008 at which the defendant appeared with

counsel. One exhibit was offered by the defendant and admitted over objection. Two witnesses

testified for the government. I now recommend that the following findings of fact be adopted,

and that the motion be denied.

                                 I. Proposed Findings of Fact

       On January 29, 2008, special agent Stephen E. Hickey, Jr., of the federal Bureau of

Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (“ATF”), in the Portland, Maine office, contacted

the defendant’s attorney regarding a warrant for the defendant’s arrest.     Hickey and the

defendant’s attorney arranged for the defendant to turn himself in to the nearest police

department, which was in Saco. ATF policy requires that a minimum of two agents transport an

arrested individual. The resident agent in charge of the Portland ATF office, Dale Armstrong,

                                               1
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 2 of 7                          PageID #: 127



was the only agent available to accompany Hickey to Saco. Local police never transport federal

prisoners to the ATF office or the Cumberland County Jail when a federal prisoner turns him or

herself in at the local police department. Such individuals are always transported by federal

officers.

        Armstrong drove Hickey’s unmarked 2002 Ford Explorer to the Saco Police Department.

Hickey keeps many of his files in this vehicle. If it was not in the vehicle when Hickey learned

that the defendant was turning himself in at the Saco Police Department, he would have retrieved

the defendant’s file from his office when he went there to meet Armstrong before driving to

Saco. Neither agent was in uniform. They arrived at the Saco Police Department at around 4:30

p.m.

        Hickey told the defendant who he was, removed the handcuffs that the Saco police had

put on the defendant, replaced them with his handcuffs, and told the defendant that he would be

transporting him to the Cumberland County Jail. Hickey had spoken with the defendant on the

telephone in the past in an attempt to question him about the “4473” form 1 that the defendant had

filled out when he had purchased the firearm here at issue.             The defendant had not been

cooperative on the telephone. Hickey had not met the defendant before January 29, 2008.

        The defendant was curious and nervous. He was very polite and congenial but kept

asking questions such as: “What can we do to take care of this?” “What is this all about?” “Why

am I under arrest?” Hickey told the defendant that he would explain everything once they got to

the jail; he wanted to get to the jail as soon as possible due to the late hour. The defendant was

placed in the rear seat of the Explorer on the passenger’s side, and Hickey got into the back seat

behind the driver, Armstrong. The defendant continued to ask questions, almost constantly.


1
  The “4473” form is the federal form on which the defendant is alleged to have made a false statement in
connection with an attempt to acquire a firearm.

                                                   2
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 3 of 7                     PageID #: 128



           Once the car was underway, Hickey told the defendant that he could not talk to him

because Hickey had already been in touch with the defendant’s attorney.             The defendant

nonetheless continued to ask questions. Hickey told the defendant that he would have to advise

him of his rights, if he kept talking. The defendant did not stop talking. Hickey, therefore, read

him his rights from the Miranda card 2 that he always carries, pausing after reading each

statement to ask whether the defendant understood. Each time, the defendant indicated that he

did understand. Hickey then asked the defendant whether he wanted to waive his rights and talk

to Hickey or to invoke his rights and remain silent. The defendant said that he did not want to

talk to Hickey.

           However, after no more than 30 seconds, the defendant began asking questions again. He

wanted to know how he had violated federal law, what would happen to him, how he could “take

care of this,” and similar queries. Hickey told the defendant that he had just informed him of his

rights, and that he could only answer his questions if the defendant waived his right to have his

attorney present.        The defendant then waived his rights and asked Hickey to answer his

questions. Hickey showed the defendant the “4473” form on which he is alleged to have made

the false statement at issue and a copy of the protection order that was in force against the

defendant at the time that the form was signed. He told the defendant that his arrest was based

on this paperwork.

           The defendant asked Hickey why they were not previously able to deal with this issue “as

gentlemen on the phone.” Hickey reminded the defendant that, when he had called the defendant

to discuss the matter, the defendant had said “That’s up to you and the government to deal with.”

The defendant responded that, at the time, he had “things going on then” and that he “was in a

bad place.” During that telephone conversation, the defendant had kept repeating that “they”
2
    Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).

                                                  3
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 4 of 7                                PageID #: 129



could not take his guns away.           The only question Hickey asked the defendant during the

transport was why he had not returned Hickey’s telephone calls. The transport took about half

an hour.

        The defendant said that he had attempted to buy a firearm. The response to Question

12(h) on the “4473” form indicates that the defendant was not subject to a protection order, but

court records show that a protection order was in effect against him at the time. Hickey then said

that “we have to assume that the person who filled out this form lied.” The defendant said that

he had filled out the form. The defendant explained that he had a “note” from the state-court

judge that said that, even though a protection order had issued, the defendant could possess guns

for hunting and that the “note” was in the possession of his former attorney. This “note,” he

said, led him to believe that the protection order did not matter at the time that he was filling out

the form to obtain guns for hunting.

        Upon arrival at the jail, Hickey asked the defendant how he felt about their conversation

in the car and whether he felt that his rights had been violated in any way. The defendant replied

that he appreciated how Hickey had treated him and asked if Hickey would be at the defendant’s

initial appearance the next day and would speak on his behalf. Hickey told the defendant that he

would be at the hearing but could not speak for the defendant.

        On cross-examination, Hickey testified that he had seen Defendant’s Exhibit 1 3 at some

time subsequent to the defendant’s arrest, and that he believes it is the “note” described by the

defendant, allowing him to obtain hunting guns during the pendency of the protection order.

        Dale Armstrong testified that he drove Hickey’s car for the defendant’s transport and

heard Hickey read the defendant his Miranda rights.

3
 Defendant’s Exhibit 1 is an order dated September 16, 2004 from the Maine Tenth District Court in the matter of
Kerry Vermette v. Karl Knight, Docket No. SPRDC-PA-04-116, ordering that “the Defendant shall be entitled to
possess firearms and obtain a hunting license during the pendency of a Consent Order issued in this case.”

                                                       4
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 5 of 7                    PageID #: 130



                                         II. Discussion

       The government conceded at oral argument that the defendant was in custody at all

relevant times on January 29, 2008. Accordingly, the only questions are whether the defendant

was interrogated during the transport and, if so, whether he knowingly and voluntarily waived

his constitutional rights. Counsel for the defendant argued at the close of the evidence that the

court should “infer” that Hickey’s actions during the transport were “tantamount to questioning”

under Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291 (1980), in that Hickey knew that what he said to the

defendant would elicit an incriminating response and, thus, whatever the defendant said should

be suppressed.

       Innis held that the Miranda safeguards come into play whenever law enforcement

officers who have an individual in custody should know that their words or actions are

reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from that individual. 446 U.S. at 301. Here,

however, nothing that Hickey said to the defendant before reading him his Miranda rights can

reasonably be construed to meet the Innis standard. Hickey showed the defendant the paperwork

that formed the basis of the charge against him only after the warnings were read and the

defendant explicitly waived his Miranda rights. Thus, the argument of counsel for the defendant

that the presentation of the paperwork was designed to elicit an incriminating response provides

no reason to suppress the defendant’s incriminating statements.

       At oral argument on August 4, 2008, counsel for the defendant also argued that the court

should not view as a waiver the defendant’s response to Hickey’s statement to him that Hickey

could not answer his questions unless he waived his right to have his attorney present, because 1)

the court cannot infer a waiver when there is no evidence that the defendant said, “I’ve thought

better of it and now I’m uninvoking the rights I just invoked,” citing North Carolina v. Butler,



                                                5
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 6 of 7                      PageID #: 131



441 U.S. 369 (1979), and 2) Hickey should have called the defendant’s attorney, whose

telephone number he had at the time, and allowed the defendant to talk to him before answering

any of the defendant’s questions.

       The holding in Butler was not, as counsel for the defendant suggested, that a defendant

does not waive his Miranda rights merely by talking to law enforcement officers, but rather that

an explicit statement of waiver is not necessary to find that a defendant has in fact waived those

rights. 441 U.S. at 373. Here, Hickey’s unrebutted testimony that the defendant said “yes” when

asked “Do you want to waive your rights to be silent and to have an attorney present?” means

that the court does not have to infer a waiver. This explicit waiver is sufficient. Contrary to the

defendant’s argument, it is not necessary that the defendant also add, “I am changing my mind

and now I waive my rights,” or words to that effect.

       Counsel for the defendant cited no authority for his second argument, that Hickey, who

happened to have a cell phone with him and happened to know the telephone number of the

defendant’s attorney, was required to call the defendant’s attorney, take off the defendant’s

handcuffs, and tell the defendant to speak to his attorney before he could answer the defendant’s

questions, even after the defendant indicated that he waived his rights. I am aware of no such

authority and doubt that any court would hold that law enforcement officers have such an

obligation, let alone one of constitutional dimension. See generally Fuentes v. Moran, 733 F.2d

176, 181 (1st Cir. 1984) (officers not required to inform defendant in custody that his attorney

had called to inquire about his status). A knowing and voluntary waiver of the rights is all that is

required, and that is what Hickey obtained in this case.




                                                 6
Case 2:07-cr-00127-DBH Document 62 Filed 08/07/08 Page 7 of 7                     PageID #: 132



                                         III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that the proposed findings of fact herein be

adopted and that the motion to suppress be DENIED.



                                              NOTICE

        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days
after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral
argument before the district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the
objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review
by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 7th day of August, 2008.
                                                     /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                     John H. Rich III
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 7
