Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 1 of 6                   PageID #: 160



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                    )
                                            )
v.                                          )              Criminal No. 08-92-P-H
                                            )
CHARLES SMALL, JR.,                         )
    a//k/a Kelly Small,                     )
                                            )
              Defendant                     )


                RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


       The defendant, Charles Small, Jr., a/k/a/ Kelly Small, charged in a complaint with

possession of a firearm by a felon, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1)), Complaint (Docket No.

1), moves to suppress the two firearms that form the basis of the charge against him. Motion to

Suppress Evidence (“Motion”) (Docket No. 51) at 1. An evidentiary hearing was held before me

on September 16, 2008, at which the defendant was present with his attorney. Two witnesses

were called by the government. The defendant called no witnesses. No exhibits were offered. I

now recommend that the court adopt the following proposed findings of fact and that the motion

be denied.

                                 I. Proposed Findings of Fact

       John MacDonald, a Maine state game warden assigned to the Freeport district, first

became familiar with the defendant about a year before the events giving rise to this case. On

November 5, 2007, Jeremy Warren Judd, a Maine state game warden since February 2003 and

then assigned to the towns of Falmouth, Yarmouth, North Yarmouth, Cumberland, Gray, and

New Gloucester, received a report of an escaped domestic red deer at large in North Yarmouth.

The owner told Judd that he believed that a hunter named Charles Small had cut the gate to allow

                                                1
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 2 of 6                   PageID #: 161



the deer to escape; other residents of the area told Judd the same thing. Judd was familiar with

Charles Small, the defendant herein, because a few years before these events, the Maine State

Police had contacted Judd while trying to locate Small. Judd called MacDonald and they

decided to work together on the case. They both knew that the defendant was a convicted felon

and thus a person prohibited from possessing firearms. Judd also confirmed the defendant’s

status as a convicted felon through the Maine State Police.

         On November 21, 2007, at around 2:00 p.m., Judd found the defendant’s truck, a 1990

blue and white Chevrolet pickup truck with a cap, parked at the end of Sweetser Road in North

Yarmouth, in an area popular with hunters. He called MacDonald, who came to the scene. The

truck was parked on a dirt road in front of the gate to property owned by the water district. The

area behind the gate was wooded. Across the road from the gate was a field, beyond which was

another wooded area. MacDonald “ran” the license plate of the truck and confirmed that it was

registered to the defendant.

         The two wardens approached the defendant’s truck in Judd’s warden service vehicle.

They looked around the area, looked for tracks leading away from the defendant’s truck, and

looked into the truck through its windows. Under the cap, they saw a bow case and hunting

apparel in the bed of the truck. In the cab of the truck, they saw a gun case marked “TC” on the

floor in front of the passenger seat; MacDonald knew this to be a case for a Thompson

Contender, a handgun that some people use for hunting. They did not see any firearms in the

truck. They then looked for a place to conceal Judd’s truck while they watched the defendant’s

truck.    After one false start, they concealed themselves about 200 yards away from the

defendant’s truck. By this time it was about 3:30 p.m.




                                                2
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 3 of 6                    PageID #: 162



       About 10 to 15 minutes later, MacDonald saw two people dressed in hunter orange

emerge from the woods and head toward the defendant’s truck. From that distance, he could not

determine the gender of the two or otherwise identify them, nor could he see anything in their

hands. The tall grass in the field obscured their hands somewhat. MacDonald drove Judd’s

truck toward the defendant’s truck, which required him to make a sharp right turn, breaking eye-

contact for some period of time. He stopped 25 to 30 feet from the defendant’s truck.

       When the wardens arrived at the defendant’s truck, the defendant was standing just inside

the open door on the driver’s side; his minor son was either standing outside the open passenger

door of the truck or sitting on the passenger seat. MacDonald and Judd both recognized the

defendant, but after they identified themselves as game wardens, Judd asked for identification.

The defendant showed him a hunting license in his name. The wardens could see two firearms in

the cab of the truck. Both were rifles with their barrels on the floorboards and their butts on the

seats, one immediately to the right of the space where the driver would sit and the other near

where a single passenger would sit. The defendant was standing within three feet of one of the

rifles. Judd asked the defendant to move to the front of the defendant’s truck and remove his

jacket. The defendant did so; he was cooperative at all times. Judd then handcuffed the

defendant and told him that he was under arrest as a felon in possession of a firearm. The

defendant was placed in Judd’s vehicle.

       At some point after he was arrested, the defendant said that the firearms were not his and

that he had not been hunting with them but rather just accompanying his son, who was 10 or 11

years old. He also suggested that someone might have come to his truck and put the guns there.

       The wardens called the Maine State Police for assistance, and Trooper Lucas Hare

subsequently arrived at the scene. In the meantime, MacDonald called a woman, believed to be



                                                3
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 4 of 6                    PageID #: 163



the defendant’s girlfriend, whose telephone number the defendant had given him, to ask her to

come to the scene and pick up the defendant’s minor son. At the defendant’s request, the

wardens agreed to wait to transport him to the Cumberland County Jail until the woman arrived

to pick up his son. As the defendant left, or shortly before, Judd searched the cab of the

defendant’s truck and found an unloaded 12-gauge shotgun on the driver’s side of the bench seat,

a loaded 12-gauge shotgun on the passenger’s side of the bench seat, and an unloaded bolt action

rifle behind the seat, along with ammunition for all three.

          Judd had binoculars with him, as he always carries them in his warden service vehicle.

MacDonald was not sure whether he had binoculars with him. Neither warden saw the defendant

or his son open the doors of the defendant’s truck.

                                          II. Discussion

          The defendant contends that the wardens lacked probable cause to search his truck

because they did not see the individuals dressed in hunter orange carrying any firearms. Motion

at 4. The government responds that the wardens had probable cause to arrest the defendant for

constructive possession of a firearm and that the search was validly conducted incident to that

arrest. Government’s Objection to Defendant’s Motion to Suppress (Docket No. 57) at [2]-[3].

          There can be no question that the wardens had probable cause to arrest the defendant for

constructive possession of a firearm by a felon regardless of what they saw before they

encountered him. Clearly, standing inside the open driver’s side door of his truck, the defendant

was the driver of his truck, since the only other person in his vicinity, a 10 or 11 year old boy,

could not possibly have been. The defendant, known to the wardens to be a felon prohibited

from possessing firearms, was standing within three feet of a shotgun which could have been

loaded.     Additionally, the facts known to the wardens when they earlier approached the



                                                 4
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 5 of 6                      PageID #: 164



defendant’s truck in a public area gave them sufficient reason to do so and to “stake out” the

truck in order to see whether the defendant returned to it in possession of a prohibited firearm.

       “Law enforcement officers may effect warrantless arrests provided that they have

probable cause to believe that the suspect has committed or is committing a crime.” United

States v. Martinez-Molina, 64 F.3d 719, 726 (1st Cir. 1995). The government need only show

that “at the time of the arrest, the facts and circumstances known to the arresting officers were

sufficient to warrant a prudent person in believing that the defendant had committed or was

committing an offense.” Id. “Probable cause is to be determined based on the collective

knowledge and information of all the officers involved.” United States v. Bizier, 111 F.3d 214,

217 (1st Cir. 1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

       The crime of possession of a firearm by a felon includes constructive possession. United

States v. Diaz, 519 F.3d 56, 66 (1st Cir. 2008).          “Constructive possession is proven by

demonstrating that [the defendant] knowingly had the power and intention at a given time of

exercising dominion and control over a firearm directly or through others.” United States v.

Sanchez-Badillo, __ F.3d __, 2008 WL 3916465 (1st Cir. Aug. 27, 2008), at *5 (citation and

internal punctuation omitted). It is sufficient to establish constructive possession of a firearm

that the gun was found on the bench seat of a pickup truck in which the defendant was a

passenger. Id. Accordingly, it is all the more sufficient that the firearm in this case was on the

bench seat of the truck within three feet of the owner and driver of the truck.

       Next, the question is whether Judd conducted a proper search of the truck incident to the

arrest of the defendant. The question is not, strictly speaking, whether he had probable cause to

conduct a warrantless search for the guns that were in plain sight, but rather, as the government

contends, whether he had the authority to conduct the search incident to the arrest. This is a



                                                 5
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 65 Filed 09/19/08 Page 6 of 6                     PageID #: 165



recognized exception to the legal requirement that a warrant be issued before a search takes

place. Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 735-36 (1983). The “plain view” doctrine, although not

invoked by the government, is also applicable in this case. See id. The wardens did not violate

the law by placing themselves in a position from which they could clearly see the two guns that

are the subject of the defendant’s motion, nor does the defendant argue otherwise. Id.

       A search incident to arrest may be conducted of the area within a vehicle reasonably

accessible to the defendant at the time of the arrest, even if at the time of the search he is under

physical restraint and at some distance from the vehicle searched. United States v. Doward, 41

F.3d 789, 791-93 & n.1 (1st Cir. 1994). That is precisely what happened in this case after the

defendant was handcuffed. No legal infirmity arose as a result.

                                         III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that the findings of fact proposed herein be

adopted and that the defendant’s motion to suppress be DENIED.

                                               NOTICE

        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days
after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral
argument before the district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the
objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review
by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 19th day of September, 2008.

                                                     /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                     John H. Rich III
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge


                                                 6
