Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 1 of 7      PageID #: 384



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                             DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA             )
                                     )
                                     )
v.                                   )            CRIMINAL NO. 08-92-P-H
                                     )
CHARLES SMALL,                       )
                                     )
                  DEFENDANT          )


     DECISION AND ORDER ON MOTION FOR WITHDRAWAL OF PLEA


      The defendant Charles Small has moved to withdraw his guilty plea and

requests an evidentiary hearing. Mot. for Withdrawal of Plea (Docket Item 133).

His grounds are that (1) “he felt pressured to enter a plea and did so

involuntarily,” (2) “he has a viable defense to the Indictment,” and (3) “there is

also insufficient evidence to support the finding of Guilt.”      Id. at 1.   The

government objects to the motion. Gov’t’s Objection to Def.’s Mot. to Withdraw

Guilty Plea (Docket Item 137).     The motion and the request for evidentiary

hearing are both DENIED.

      A guilty plea accepted as the result of a properly conducted Rule 11

colloquy leaves a defendant with a very limited basis upon which to withdraw

the plea later.   A defendant may, however, withdraw a guilty plea before

sentencing if he “can show a fair and just reason for requesting the

withdrawal.”   Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(d)(2)(B).    The First Circuit directs me to

consider five factors: (1) whether the defendant pleaded guilty voluntarily,

knowingly and intelligently and whether the court adequately observed the
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 2 of 7       PageID #: 385



formalities imposed by Rule 11; (2) whether the defendant has asserted a

serious claim of innocence; (3) the force of the reasons offered by the

defendant; (4) the timing of the motion; and (5) any countervailing prejudice to

the government if the defendant is permitted to withdraw his plea.          United

States v. Padilla-Galarza, 351 F.3d 594, 597 (1st Cir. 2003).

        As to the first factor, the defendant’s motion does not allege any specific

defects in the Rule 11 hearing, but asserts that he felt pressured to enter a

plea.     There is nothing in the record to support such a contention.         The

defendant had an evidentiary hearing before a Magistrate Judge on his motion

to suppress, and then oral argument before me on his objections to the

Recommended Decision.        Thereafter, a jury trial date was set, a jury was

empanelled, and trial briefs and proposed jury instructions were filed.        The

government filed a motion in limine concerning a particular defense and

witness, and I planned to rule on that motion during the course of the trial.

But the parties both requested that I hear the proposed testimony on the first

day of trial outside the jury’s presence before opening statements occurred. I

did so, and then ruled against the defendant on the government’s motions in

limine.

        After a recess, the defendant and the government agreed to a conditional

guilty plea, conditioned upon the defendant’s right to appeal my adverse

rulings on both the motion to suppress and the motion in limine. I therefore

proceeded with a Rule 11 colloquy while the jury waited in the jury room. The

defendant acknowledged to me at the Rule 11 hearing that nobody coerced him

to plead guilty. The defendant acknowledged to me his frustration: “It’s just I
                                                                                 2
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 3 of 7              PageID #: 386



got no defense now; my witnesses were all canceled out.” Tr. at 8. To that, I

responded:

              Well, I understand, but I have to go through asking you
              these questions to make sure you understand the choices
              that you’re making, Mr. Small. But I do understand that,
              and let’s just put on the record, as I understand from what
              the clerk’s told me, the conditional plea agreement is going
              to permit you to appeal my rulings both on the motion to
              suppress and on the exclusion of the witnesses that you
              wanted to call. That’s going to be part of the conditional
              plea . . . . So you are going to be able to take those issues
              up on appeal.

Id. Thus, the defendant was not pressured to enter the plea. Instead, he made

a rational choice (thereby presumably gaining acceptance of responsibility in

sentencing) in light of the adverse ruling.

       As for the other formalities of Rule 11, the record demonstrates that the

defendant agreed that he had read the Indictment, that he had an adequate

opportunity to review it with his lawyer, and that his lawyer had explained the

elements and the nature of the offense to him.                I fully explained to the

defendant his rights regarding a trial and the possible penalties he faced. The

defendant acknowledged that he understood the charge and its associated

penalties and that he was pleading guilty because he was actually guilty.

Thereafter, the defendant conceded that there was a factual basis for the plea

and adopted the government’s version of the facts as spelled out orally by the

prosecutor.1 In sum, the record clearly supports my conclusion at the end of

the plea hearing―that the defendant’s plea was knowing, voluntary, and

intelligent. Tr. at 18-19. See United States v. Marrero-Rivera, 124 F.3d 342,

1There is no indication that the defendant was intimidated or afraid to speak up when he did
not understand something that was said during the Rule 11 hearing.


                                                                                          3
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 4 of 7              PageID #: 387



348 n.7 (1st Cir. 1997) (the First Circuit has “identified three ‘core’ Rule 11

concerns: (1) voluntariness- i.e., absence of coercion; (2) understanding of the

charge; and (3) knowledge of the consequences of the guilty plea”).

       On the second factor, the defendant’s motion does not supply the

necessary basis for a serious claim of innocence. A general denial of guilt is

not enough; the defendant “must affirmatively advance an objectively

reasonable argument that he is innocent.”             United States v. Cray, 47 F.3d

1203, 1209 (D.C. Cir. 1995); United States v. Ramos, 810 F.2d 308, 312 (1st

Cir. 1987) (“[I]f defendant's factual contentions create no legally cognizable

defense to the charges, he has not effectively denied his culpability, and the

motion can be denied.”)(internal quotations omitted).               The charge here is

simple: that the defendant was a felon in possession of firearms. There is no

suggestion that he is not a felon or that the items in question are not firearms

in or affecting commerce.        The only issue is possession.         All the defendant

asserts is that the government cannot prove the elements of constructive

possession. Mot. to Withdraw Guilty Plea at 1. But his statements at the Rule

11 hearing―where the defendant: (1) acknowledged that his lawyer explained

all the elements of the offense charged; (2) admitted that he was guilty of the

charged offense; and (3) accepted the government’s stated version of the facts―

belie a viable claim of actual innocence. Based on the government’s proffered

version of the facts I found there was sufficient evidence to establish the

element of constructive possession.2


2 During the plea colloquy, the Government asserted that if the matter proceeded to trial it
(continued on next page)

                                                                                          4
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 5 of 7               PageID #: 388



       On the third factor, there is no force to the defendant’s reasons for

withdrawing the plea. They are limited to the assertions that he felt pressured


could prove the following:
                       That on November 21, 2007, officers of the Maine Warden
               Service were “looking for the defendant, who they believed to be
               hunting. The wardens would testify that they located a blue and
               white 1990 Chevy pickup truck bearing Maine black bear
               registration plate 158ACJ, a vehicle registered to and known to be
               operated by the defendant, parked on the Sweetser Road outside
               a gate near a power line. The Government would offer as an
               exhibit at trial the certified copy of the registration of the vehicle
               to Mr. Small. [T]he wardens would testify that they looked in the
               vehicle, which was unoccupied, and observed hunting equipment
               and a handgun case on the floor of the vehicle. However, no
               firearms could be seen in the vehicle through the window. The
               wardens then concealed themselves approximately a thousand
               feet away across a field . . . awaiting [ ] the defendant to return to
               his vehicle and observing the area through binoculars.
                       Approximately 30 minutes after they left the defendant's
               vehicle the wardens would testify that they observed two subjects
               dressed in hunter's orange clothing walking towards the
               defendant's vehicle at the location on Sweetser Road.             The
               wardens then approached the vehicle and, as they approached it,
               two subjects began entering it. By the time they got to the vehicle
               in their vehicle the wardens would testify that they identified the
               individuals as the defendant and his then 10-year-old son. The
               son was standing on the right side, passenger's side, of the
               vehicle with the door open. The defendant was standing on the
               driver's side with the door open. Warden Judd would testify that
               he immediately noticed that there were now two long guns sitting
               in the truck which were not there before. A further search
               revealed that there was a third firearm and ammunition in the
               vehicle. The three firearms named in the indictment which you
               read previously during this hearing are the three firearms which
               the Government would offer as three exhibits during the trial.
                       In particular, Your Honor, the Remington Arms Company,
               which would be Government's Exhibit 1, which is the 12-gauge
               shotgun that you listed in the indictment, was the one closest to
               Mr. Small, approximately arm's length away in the vehicle, and
               we would offer photographs which would show the distance of the
               firearm and where it was placed inside the truck. The evidence
               would indicate under these circumstances―the Government
               would offer evidence that Mr. Small was there alone with his son
               and that his son was not able to drive the vehicle. In addition,
               the Government would offer evidence that Mr. Small had one
               round of ammunition in his pocket and four spent shell casings of
               the same type of ammunition that was inside the 12-gauge
               shotgun which was closest to Mr. Small in the vehicle.
Tr. at 11-13. The defendant agreed that these were the facts and when I asked if he had any
doubt about the facts, Mr. Small responded “No.” Tr. at 14. This evidence clearly establishes
the element of constructive possession.


                                                                                           5
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 6 of 7     PageID #: 389



and that he has a viable defense to constructive possession, both of which I

have found wanting.

      On the fourth factor, the timing of the motion, the First Circuit has

stated that it “is highly probative of motive [and] close scrutiny of the

chronology is important in adjudicating whether retraction is fair and just.”

United States v. Muriel, 111 F.3d 975, 980 (1st Cir. 1997) (citation omitted).

“The rule of thumb is that the longer a defendant waits before moving to

withdraw his plea, the more potency his motion must have in order to gain

favorable consideration.”   United States v. Parrilla-Tirado, 22 F.3d 368, 371

(1st Cir. 1994).   On the other hand, “‘[a] swift change of heart’ . . . strongly

indicates that the plea was entered in ‘haste and confusion.’” Ramos, 810 F.2d

at 312 (quoting United States v. Barker, 514 F.2d 208, 222 (D.C. Cir. 1975)).

      Here, the defendant’s motion to withdraw was not filed until three

months after he pled guilty.     When he decided to plead guilty, a jury was

waiting in the jury room to try him, his lawyer had filed a trial brief and

proposed jury instructions, and all were ready to proceed.      The decision to

plead guilty therefore suggested a strong desire to avoid trial. Although the

defendant claims (through his lawyer’s assertion in the legal memorandum)

that he told his lawyer he wanted to withdraw his plea within 24 hours, I note

that the lawyer who represented him at that time withdrew as counsel almost

two months after the plea and, although new counsel was promptly appointed,

the motion to withdraw the plea was not filed for still another month. On this

record, I do not find that this belated change of heart supports granting the



                                                                                6
Case 2:08-cr-00092-JDL Document 138 Filed 06/19/09 Page 7 of 7                  PageID #: 390



motion and instead suggests that the defendant is simply trying to delay

resolution of the matter.

        Finally, on the fifth factor, the government does not contend that it

would suffer prejudice if I were to grant the motion, but that alone is not

enough to grant the motion. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 32 advisory committee’s note

(“Given the great care with which pleas are taken under [the] revised Rule 11,

there is no reason to view pleas so taken as merely ‘tentative,’ subject to

withdrawal before sentence whenever the government cannot establish

prejudice.”) (cited with approval in United States v. Hyde, 520 U.S. 670 (1997)).

        Considering all the relevant factors in this case, I DENY the defendant’s

request for an evidentiary hearing3 and his Motion for Withdrawal of Guilty

Plea.

        SO ORDERED.

        DATED THIS 19TH DAY OF JUNE, 2009


                                                   /S/D. BROCK HORNBY
                                                   D. BROCK HORNBY
                                                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




3 A defendant is not entitled to an evidentiary hearing on his motion to withdraw when “the
facts alleged are contradicted by the record or are inherently incredible and to the extent that
they are merely conclusions rather than statements of fact.” United States v. Pulido, 566 F.3d
52 (1st Cir. 2009). Here the defendant has not given me any basis upon which to hold a
hearing.


                                                                                              7
