Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 157 Filed 07/20/09 Page 1 of 3                      PageID #: 455



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                     )
                                              )
v.                                            ) Crim. No. 6-57-B-W
                                              )
WILLIAM C. BURHOE,                            )
                                              )
               Defendant                      )

                              RECOMMENDED DECISION ON
                                   COMPETENCY

       On July 7, 2009, the Court referred to me for hearing William Burhoe’s Motion to

Suppress (Doc. No. 133). Burhoe’s case in this court began in September 2006 when he was

indicted by a federal grand jury and charged with knowingly possessing a firearm after having

been committed to a mental institution. On October 6, 2009, this court ordered Burhoe

committed to a suitable federal facility for the purpose of a competency examination. (Doc. No.

10). Following that evaluation, this court found Burhoe incompetent to stand and ordered him

committed to a federal facility for a period not to exceed four months in order to ascertain if the

defendant’s mental condition could be so improved as to render him competent to proceed to

trial. That Order was entered on June 20, 2007. (Doc. No. 42). For almost two full years

Burhoe remained committed pursuant to the court’s Order, during which time the court revisited

numerous issues related to Burhoe’s competency, including a request for involuntary medication.

Finally on May 13, 2009, Burhoe was returned to this court and found competent to stand trial.

(Doc. No. 121). Defendant was arraigned on the indictment and an order entered in respect to

discovery. (Doc. No. 122). On May 21, 2009, I entered an order of detention pending trial, but

the trial has been rescheduled a number of times due to the pendency of this motion to suppress.
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 157 Filed 07/20/09 Page 2 of 3                      PageID #: 456



       When the motion was referred to me, I attempted to schedule to prompt hearing, but

before the hearing could be scheduled Burhoe’s attorney filed a Motion for Hearing to Determine

Competency (Doc. No. 146), advising the court that Burhoe was no longer competent to proceed

with either the hearing on the motion to suppress or with the trial of this matter. I scheduled the

motion for hearing and held the preliminary hearing to determine competence on July 20, 2009.

I heard from one witness, Bruce B. Kerr, Ph.D., who opined that Burhoe’s condition had

deteriorated and that Burhoe was no longer legally competent. The Government did not

challenge Kerr’s assessment.

       Kerr met with Burhoe on two occasions, June 18, 2009, and then again on June 29, 2009.

He also reviewed an extensive collection of medical records, including the report prepared by the

federal medical examiners pursuant to this court’s prior order. According to Kerr, Burhoe is

suffering from pronounced delusional beliefs that his attorney is deceiving him and is doing so

for his own nefarious purposes. Burhoe believes both David Bate, his federal attorney, and

Walter Hanstein, his state attorney, are both involved in this conspiracy. Kerr concluded that the

problem was not unique to the Bate/Burhoe relationship, but rather was a product of Burhoe’s

delusional beliefs. Kerr noted that at the first meeting, on June 18, Burhoe seemed more lucid

and that while he maintained some delusional beliefs about Bate, those beliefs were not essential

to the attorney/client relationship. By the time Kerr returned on June 29, Burhoe’s paranoia was

so intense as to undermine Burhoe’s capacity for a factual and rational understanding of the

proceedings against him. Burhoe’s paranoia regarding his attorneys and the legal system raise

significant concerns about the basis of any legal decisions he might make based on his delusional

understanding of the process and the legal advice/protection he is receiving. Kerr concluded the

clinical data would not support a legal finding of competence and I am forced to agree with him.



                                                 2
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 157 Filed 07/20/09 Page 3 of 3                      PageID #: 457



Burhoe declined to address the court at the hearing and thus I have no personal observations that

would differ from those reported by Kerr.

       According to Kerr, based upon Burhoe’s past history there is a probability that

medication and clinical treatment in a controlled in-patient environment would restore Burhoe’s

competency, at least on a temporary basis. Kerr cautioned that Burhoe’s competency would

most likely be “fragile” and “fleeting.” I would thus recommend that this court once more

commit Burhoe to a federal facility with the understanding that such a commitment would

probably restore Burhoe’s competence to stand trial (and participate in a hearing on the motion

to suppress). I thus recommend that this court find Burhoe incompetent to assist counsel at a

hearing on the motion to suppress at this time. I further recommend that if Burhoe is once again

restored to competence, this matter should be processed in the most expeditious manner possible,

given Kerr’s assessment that a return to competence could be expected to be “fragile” and

“fleeting.”

                                             NOTICE

                A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
       judge's report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
       28 U.S.C. 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
       together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
       district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
       thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
       district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court's order.

                                              /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                              U.S. Magistrate Judge
       July 20, 2009




                                                 3
