      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 1 of 7



                   United States District Court
                     District of Massachusetts
________________________________
                                  )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,         )
                                  )
          v.                      )
                                  )    Criminal No.
MOISES CINTRON,                   )    07-10435-NMG
                                  )
          Defendant.              )
________________________________ )

                         MEMORANDUM & ORDER

GORTON, J.

     Defendant Moises Cintron (“Cintron”) is charged with one

count of being a felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition.

In two rulings in December, 2008 (“the December M&O”) and April,

2009 (“the April M&O”), the latter following a limited

evidentiary hearing, this Court denied Cintron’s motion to

suppress evidence and statements made.       Before the Court are

defendant’s motion to reconsider that decision and a new motion

to suppress evidence derived from an alleged Terry frisk.

I.   Background

     A.   Factual Background

     Cintron was arrested on the morning of November 7, 2007

during a vehicle stop on Route 128 in Lynnfield, Massachusetts.

The facts surrounding that arrest are recounted in detail in the

December M&O and the April M&O but are briefly summarized here.

     After observing a blue Nissan Maxima driving erratically,


                                  -1-
      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 2 of 7



Trooper Richard Gaudet (“Gaudet”) activated his lights and the

Nissan came to a stop in the left travel lane of Route 128.

Trooper Stevie Browning (“Browning”) and Sergeant Deyermond

(“Deyermond”) arrived on the scene momentarily.        The stopped

vehicle contained three occupants: a female driver, a young girl

in the front passenger seat and Cintron, who was lying across the

back seat and appeared to be asleep or unconscious.

     The events immediately following the stop are in some

dispute (thereby engendering the instant motions) but the gist is

as follows.    While Browning was occupied with the driver, Gaudet

and Deyermond checked on Cintron.       Deyermond aroused him and

ordered him out of the car.     As Cintron was being removed from

the vehicle, Gaudet apparently saw the handle of what appeared to

be a gun.    According to protocol, he called out “gun” and the

attention of all three officers turned to Cintron.         He was

subdued, arrested and a gun was recovered from his coat pocket.

Where exactly the gun was located and when it was seized,

however, is not entirely clear.

     After his arrest, Cintron was placed in Browning’s police

cruiser.    Browning subsequently informed Cintron of his

Miranda rights and transported him to the police barracks in

Danvers, Massachusetts.    Upon arrival, Browning took Cintron to

the booking area, re-advised him of his Miranda rights and

Cintron indicated that he understood.       Cintron was, however,


                                  -2-
      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 3 of 7



under the influence of heroin.

     Cintron was subsequently interviewed several times, once by

Browning, once by Officer Scott Frost, a member of the Danvers

Police Department and a Drug Recognition Expert, and once by

Special Agent Michael Turner of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,

Firearms and Explosives.    During the interviews, Cintron admitted

that he had purchased the firearm but he did not consistently

report the details of that purchase.

     B.    Procedural History

     Cintron was indicted on December 19, 2007 and filed a motion

to suppress on July 17, 2008.     This Court denied most of that

motion in the December M&O but concluded that an evidentiary

hearing was necessary to determine the validity of Cintron’s

Miranda waiver.   An evidentiary hearing was held on January 30,

2009 and supplemental briefing was subsequently submitted by both

parties.   The Court denied the remainder of Cintron’s motion in

the April M&O, finding that his voluntary intoxication did not

have any material effect on the validity of his Miranda waiver.

     The case was scheduled for trial during the summer of 2009

and was proceeding accordingly.      During that time, the government

sent three letters to defendant’s counsel pursuant to Local Rule

116.2(B)(2), which requires disclosure of exculpatory evidence

not later than 21 days prior to trial.       In late July, 2009,

however, trial was delayed when defendant’s counsel, Attorney


                                  -3-
       Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 4 of 7



Robert Galibois, filed a motion to withdraw.         This Court allowed

that motion after a hearing on July 31, 2009, and Attorney Page

Kelley was appointed to represent defendant a few days later.

      The trial date was subsequently postponed several times and,

in late February, 2010, the defendant filed 1) a motion for

reconsideration of this Court’s previous denial of his motion to

suppress and 2) a new motion to suppress.        Cintron also seeks

another evidentiary hearing and has submitted a new affidavit in

support of his motion.     The government opposed both motions the

following month.    Oral argument on the pending motions was heard

on Thursday, April 15, 2010.

II.   Analysis

      Both of defendant’s motions arise from his contention that

the three letters he received from the government during the

summer of 2009 (at which point his previous motion to suppress

had been denied in full) illuminate factual disputes and changes

in the government’s story significant enough to revisit the

suppression issue.    In particular, Cintron argues that the facts

revealed in the letters differ from police reports and affidavits

that were before the Court when it denied his motion in the first

instance.   That proposition forms the basis for his motion for

reconsideration.

      In support of his new motion to suppress, defendant

elaborates further and advances a new theory.         Specifically, his


                                   -4-
      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 5 of 7



February, 2010 affidavit contends that his gun was not in plain

view because it was buttoned inside his jacket pocket and was not

discovered until he was completely out of the car and pat-

frisked.   Because the officers had no reasonable suspicion that

he was armed and dangerous to justify such a pat-frisk, Cintron

maintains, the search was unlawful and the evidence derived

therefrom must be suppressed.     Cintron’s motion does not explain

why he waited until now to make this argument.

     The government responds that 1) defendant’s request is

untimely and 2) no factual allegations have changed apart from

Cintron’s own self-serving affidavit and some immaterial

confusion about which pocket held the gun.       With respect to the

first point, the government contends that, 1) because the

deadline for motions has long passed, the defendant must

demonstrate “good cause” and 2) he cannot do so because there is

no new information apart from Cintron’s new revelation which he

should have asserted previously.      The government also finds it

suspicious that, under Cintron’s prior unsuccessful theory, he

claimed he was too intoxicated to have knowingly waived his

Miranda rights but now, having lost that argument, he recalls

important details about the stop.

     With respect to the three letters, the government argues

that the officers’ allegations have not materially changed and a

difference of opinion over the gun’s location is insignificant.


                                  -5-
      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 6 of 7



More importantly, the government contends that Gaudet has

maintained all along that he saw the gun while Cintron was still

in the car and that fact alone is sufficient to sustain this

Court’s prior ruling that the gun was properly seized because it

was in plain view.

     Defendant’s motions will be denied and another evidentiary

hearing is deemed unnecessary.     As an initial matter, at oral

argument, counsel for the defendant explained his sudden reversal

of theories for suppression, and his reason for filing a

supporting affidavit for the first time in February, 2010, by

blaming prior counsel for advancing a poor legal theory against

the defendant’s wishes.    The fact that Cintron has been appointed

new counsel, however, does not give him a fresh start toward

suppression.   Nor, for that matter, does it explain why Cintron

did not contest Trooper Gaudet’s version of events until 16

months after Gaudet’s affidavit to which the defendant had the

right to respond.

     In any event, the Court has carefully reviewed all of the

pleadings in this case and concludes that nothing material has

changed in the government’s account that warrants yet another

review of the issue.    In sending the three informational letters

to defense counsel, the Assistant United States Attorney was

properly exercising caution but the information therein does not

alter the “plain view” conclusion upon which the Court previously


                                  -6-
      Case 1:07-cr-10435-NMG Document 70 Filed 04/26/10 Page 7 of 7



denied Cintron’s motion to suppress.      Specifically, the

government’s contention has always been and remains that one or

more officers saw the gun in plain view before it was seized.

The officers had an uncontested right to remove Cintron from the

vehicle and when (and in which pocket) the gun was discovered do

not bear on whether it was in plain view.       The only evidence that

contravenes the Court’s previous ruling is, therefore, Cintron’s

affidavit, the timing and circumstances of which is so suspect

that the Court declines to give it credit over the officers’

consistent account.

     Accordingly, both Cintron’s motion for reconsideration and

his untimely motion to suppress will be denied.



                                 ORDER

     In accordance with the foregoing,

     1)   defendant’s motion for reconsideration (Docket No. 62)
          is DENIED; and

     2)   defendant’s motion to suppress (Docket No. 63) is
          DENIED.


So ordered.

                                 /s/ Nathaniel M. Gorton
                                 Nathaniel M. Gorton
                                 United States District Judge

Dated April 26, 2010




                                  -7-
