 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 1 of 6                   PageID #: 60



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                    )
                                             )
v.                                           )       Crim. No. 9-54-B-W
                                             )
CURTIS TODD ZETTERMAN,                       )
                                             )
               Defendant.                    )

                               RECOMMENDED DECISION

       Curtis Zetterman, who is charged with possession of a firearm after having been

committed to a mental institution, has moved to suppress the firearm seized from his residence

following a warrantless search and seizure on October 20, 2008. The United States seeks to

justify the search based upon exigent circumstances associated with the commission of a violent

crime. An evidentiary hearing was held on November 12, 2009. I now recommend the court

adopt the following proposed findings of fact and deny the motion to suppress.

                                  Proposed Findings of Fact

       On October 20, 2008, at approximately 5:35 p.m., Brian Gorneault called the Caribou

Police Department and claimed that Curtis Zetterman pointed a gun at him as Gorneault was

attempting to enter his former sister-in-law’s apartment. Caribou Police Officer Douglas Bell

received the information from police dispatch. Bell was familiar with Mr. Zetterman because of

prior complaints from both Zetterman and others in the neighborhood involving various

allegations by Zetterman of neighbors spying on him and resulting arguments and

confrontations. Bell had also investigated Zetterman in regard to a check writing issue.

       Bell immediately responded to the October 20, 2008, call and found Gorneault waiting

for him. According to Gorneault, he had previous encounters with Zetterman where Curtis



                                                 1
 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 2 of 6                       PageID #: 61



would show the gun, but this time Curtis had pointed it at him. Gorneault described the gun as a

small gun with two barrels. Gorneault explained to Bell that when he tried to open the door to

the adjacent apartment, Zetterman came out and accused Gorneault of attempting to gain illegal

entry. Gorneault told Zetterman that he frequently entered the apartment and he has a key.

Gorneault told the officer that Zetterman had looked at him while holding the gun. The gun was

in his right hand and pointed directly at Gorneault. Although Gorneault did not accuse

Zetterman of saying anything threatening, when Bell asked Gorneault whether he felt threatened,

Gorneault responded, “Wouldn’t you if someone pointed a gun at you?”

       After advising Gorneault to stand back, Bell went to the door and knocked. He had to

knock several times and then holler Zetterman’s name. Finally, Zetterman asked who was

knocking and Bell identified himself as a police officer. The door to the apartment contained a

rather large glass window and Bell did not want to be visible to the occupants of the apartment.

Bell was standing to the side of the door, firearm at the ready, when Zetterman opened the door.

Bell could see both of Zetterman’s hands so he holstered his weapon. Corey Sautier, another

Caribou police officer, arrived at the scene and walked up behind Officer Bell.

       Bell asked Zetterman whether he had a small handgun. Zetterman said he did. Bell then

asked whether Zetterman had pointed the gun at anyone. Zetterman denied doing so. Bell asked

to see the gun and whether Zetterman had it on his person. Zetterman said the gun was inside his

apartment. Bell told Zetterman that he needed to see the gun and that he wanted to secure it

before they continued talking. Zetterman refused to comply at first, but then said that he would

get it. Zetterman tried to shut the door at this point, but Bell stopped him by blocking the door

with his foot. Bell told Zetterman to tell him the gun’s location in order for the officer to retrieve




                                                  2
 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 3 of 6                     PageID #: 62



it, but Zetterman proceeded to walk away from the door toward the interior of the apartment,

presumably to get the gun.

       Bell and Zetterman walked through the kitchen into a small bedroom that had a mattress

and several boxes. Zetterman started to reach into the box and Bell told him to stop. Zetterman

continued to reach toward the box. Bell drew his weapon and moved slightly so that he was not

standing where Zetterman had last seen him. Bell repeatedly told Zetterman to leave the gun in

order for the officer to retrieve it. Zetterman’s hand brought something out of the box and

dropped it on the blanket, telling Bell to get it. Bell holstered his weapon and asked Zetterman to

wait with the other officer in the kitchen. After Zetterman went to the kitchen, Bell leaned

forward and saw a derringer on the bed. He picked it up, found the lever to open it, and found

two live rounds in the barrels.

       Based on the officer’s investigation and assessment of the situation, in his opinion

Zetterman’s conduct toward Gorneault was not justified. Bell placed Zetterman under arrest for

criminal threatening with a firearm. After review by a state prosecutor, Zetterman was charged

with both criminal threatening with a weapon and reckless conduct. Once he returned to the

police station Bell learned of an October 2006 incident at Zetterman’s apartment involving the

Caribou Police Department and a different firearm. As a result of that incident, Zetterman had

been temporarily, involuntarily committed to a mental hospital.

                                           Discussion

       Under well settled Fourth Amendment principles, “[a] warrantless search of a private

residence is presumptively unreasonable.” United States v. Tibolt, 72 F.3d 965, 968 (1st Cir.

1995). However, there are exceptions to this general rule and not every search of a residence

without a warrant necessarily violates the Fourth Amendment. United States v. Lawlor, 406 F.3d



                                                3
 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 4 of 6                    PageID #: 63



37, 41 (1st Cir. 2005). In order to justify a warrantless entry to search for weapons there must

be exigent circumstances, even in circumstances where a felony has been committed and there is

probable cause to believe that incriminating evidence will be found within the residence. Payton

v. New York. 445 U.S. 573, 587-88 (1980). The government bears the burden of demonstrating

that exigent circumstances exist. United States v. Baldacchino, 762 F.2d 170, 176 (1st Cir.

1985). “Exigent circumstances” exist in conjunction with an arrest in a residence when there is

“an urgent need for immediate action that overrides the inevitable delay incident to obtaining a

warrant.” Id. (quoting United States v. Blake, 632 F.2d 731, 733 (9th Cir. 1980)).

       In this case Officer Bell knew that Zetterman had a history of neighborhood disturbances,

and based on Gorneault’s account, he had probable cause to believe that Zetterman had

committed criminal threatening with a dangerous weapon, a Class C felony under Maine law.

17-A M.R.S. §§ 209, 1252(4). He could not leave Zetterman in his apartment while seeking

warrants for his arrest and to search the residence because of the immediate concern about what

Zetterman might do next. His only logical first step was to speak with Zetterman in order to

better assess the situation. Once Zetterman acknowledged that he did have a firearm in the

apartment and announced that he would retrieve it for Bell, the situation potentially became even

more worrisome. Allowing Zetterman to go retreat behind closed doors and secure the weapon

himself simply involved too great a risk of harm to Zetterman, the officers on the scene, and

others in the apartment building, including Gorneault. In my view, the scene that unfolded in

front of Officer Bell was a classic example of “exigent circumstances,” not of the officer’s own

making. When Bell asked Zetterman for his consent to come into the apartment and get the gun,

he had no idea that Zetterman’s response would be other than yes or no. If Zetterman had

refused to produce the gun, Bell’s recourse would have been to place him under immediate arrest



                                                4
 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 5 of 6                        PageID #: 64



and secure the premises to get a warrant. If Zetterman had consented to allow Bell to enter, he

could have gotten the derringer pursuant to consent. Instead, Bell confronted an unexpected

exigency – Zetterman agreed to get the gun, announcing that he would do it himself and

attempting to shut Bell out of the apartment. He had no option but to prevent Zetterman from

closing the door and to continue following him across the small kitchen and into the back

bedroom. Until Bell was in the apartment, he did not know if there was anyone else there or

exactly where the gun would be located.

       Bell did not engage in a wholesale search of the premises. He sought and obtained the

handgun that apparently had been the subject of Gorneault’s complaint. In fact, Bell was led to

the gun by Zetterman, who “voluntarily” surrendered the weapon. Bell’s decision to follow

Zetterman, once Zetterman announced his intention to retrieve the gun, was certainly less

intrusive than placing Zetterman under immediate arrest by forcefully stopping him from going

into the bedroom, removing him from the premises, securing the premises, obtaining a search

warrant, returning to the premises, and conducting a wholesale search of the entire apartment in

an attempt to locate the small derringer hidden in some boxes stuffed with various articles of

clothing and other items. To label Bell’s actions as unreasonable would be nonsensical. He took

the only avenue open to him given the evolving circumstance confronting him. Compare United

States v. Lopez, 989 F.2d 24, 26-27 (1st Cir. 1993) (observing that the existence of a dangerous

weapon recently used in a threatening manner presents an exigent circumstance where suspect

retreats into premises upon show of police authority, and that a "proportionate" effort to recover

the weapon, "limited in its range, specific in its object," is justified); with United States v.

Weidul, 227 F. Supp. 2d 161, 165-166 (D. Me. 2002) (Mag. J. Rec. Dec., adopted over

objection) (rejecting claim of exigent circumstances where sole individual who could reasonably



                                                   5
 Case 1:09-cr-00054-JAW Document 27 Filed 11/16/09 Page 6 of 6                      PageID #: 65



be perceived as a threat was in custody at the time of the search and officers could have secured

the premises while obtaining a warrant), aff'd, 325 F.3d 50, 54 (1st Cir. 2003) (rejecting

Government's alternative argument pursued on appeal).

                                            Conclusion

       Based upon the foregoing, I recommend the Court deny the motion to suppress.

                                             NOTICE


                A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
       judge's report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
       28 U.S.C. 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
       together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
       district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days of being served with a copy
       thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument before the
       district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the objection.

              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court's order.

                                              /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                              U.S. Magistrate Judge
November 16, 2009




                                                 6
