Case 1:09-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 1 of 8

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

 

)
)
)
Plaintiff, )
)

v. ) CRIMINAL ACTION

) NO. 09-lO376-WGY
MICHAEL HART )
)
Defendant. )
)

MEMORANDUM
YOUNG, D.J. July 30, 2010

The defendant Michael Hart has been charged with one count
of felony possession of a firearm and ammunition in violation of
Title 18 of the United States Code, section 922(g)(l). Hart
moved to suppress the gun and ammunition recovered by the police.
The Court heard testimony on the motion to suppress on May 25 and
June 4, 2010, from State Troopers Marc Lavoie and Jimi Grasso, as
well as from Tiffany Gomes, a witness called by the defense.

This Court denied the motion to suppress on June 15, 2010, for
the reasons set forth herein.
I. FACTS

On July 7, 2009, five Massachusetts State Police officers

assigned to the Southeastern Massachusetts Gang Task Force

responded to the area of 102 Griffin Court in New Bedford,

Case 1:09-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 2 of 8

Massachusetts to investigate the whereabouts of three males who
had escaped from Massachusetts Department of Youth Services
(“DYS”) detention center.

l Trooper Lavoie testified that the troopers were provided
with documents containing identifying information for the DYS
escapees. The identifying information included photos and
physical descriptions, such as height, weight, and race. Trooper
Grasso testified that he was only provided racial information.
Approaching the rear of the Griffin Court address, Troopers
Lavoie and Grasso observed Hart speaking with a woman at the rear
of the building. Both officers testified that from a distance
they believed that Hart may have been one of the fugitives.

This, however, strains credulity because standing at six feet,
three inches tall, Hart is at least six inches taller than any of
the DYS escapees; Hart is also more than ten years older and
weighed over a hundred pounds more than each of the fugitives.
Physically, the only characteristic that Hart shared with one of
the fugitives was his race.

Nonetheless, Hart caught the officers' attention because he
was standing outside 102 Griffin Court. The troopers were not
wearing uniforms, but wore jackets indicating that they were
members of the task force. Hart appeared startled to see the
police officers. The woman yelled into the house, alerting the

occupants that the police were coming. Thereupon, Hart proceeded

 

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 3 of 8

to walk at a brisk pace towards a grey vehicle parked in a nearby
alley.

While the troopers' testimony differed as to the speed at
which Hart proceeded to the car and his path, both troopers
clearly observed that Hart was bent over slightly and clutching
at his waist area. Based upon their significant training and
experience, the troopers believed that Hart's posture indicated a
concealed weapon.

Trooper Grasso indicated to Trooper Lavoie that he should
follow Hart. Approaching Hart, Trooper Lavoie observed some
unusual conduct. As Hart entered the passenger side of the car,
Hart turned his body in such a manner as to shield his movement
from the officer's view. Even so, Trooper Lavoie observed Hart
reach under his shirt and remove an item from his waistband.
After Hart sat down, Trooper Lavoie saw Hart reach down in
between the seat and the door.

Upon reaching the driver's side of the vehicle, Trooper
Lavoie told Gomes, the driver, to put the car in park and to turn
off the engine. Gomes had been waiting in the car for Hart to
return from a brief visit with friends at 102 Griffin Court. She
was listening to music and did not see Hart leave 102 Griffin
Court, the approach of the troopers, or Hart's path from 102
Griffin Court to the car, Gomes only became aware of the police

officers when Trooper Lavoie asked her to put her car in park and

 

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 4 of 8

turn off the engine. Gomes testified that Hart did not appear
nervous to her and that he reached for his identification with
his right hand after Trooper Lavoie requested their
identification.

When Trooper Lavoie looked at Hart's identification, he
recognized Hart as a member of the Montes Park street gang.
Trooper Lavoie observed that Hart appeared nervous, rocking back
and forth in his seat and avoiding eye contact. In addition,
Trooper Lavoie found it unusual that Hart placed his hands on the
dashboard - without Trooper Lavoie requesting such an action ' to
show that he had nothing in his hands.

Trooper Lavoie caught Trooper Grasso's attention and Trooper
Grasso approached the vehicle. Trooper Lavoie informed Trooper
Grasso of his suspicion of a weapon and that Hart was a member of
the Montes Park street gang. The troopers moved to the passenger
side of the vehicle and ordered Hart to get out of the car. The
troopers again observed that Hart appeared very nervous. They
asked if he had anything on him, and Hart responded, “Who me? I
don't think so.” After answering, Hart looked at the area
between the seat and the door. Trooper Lavoie looked in that

direction and saw the handle of a handgun in plain view.l

 

1 Gomes's testimony regarding the events occurring after the
Terry stop differed from the events as described by the troopers.
Most significantly, she testified that the gun was not found
between the seat and the door, but rather in a plastic bag in the
back seat on the passenger side. While the Court credits some of

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 5 of 8

As Trooper Grasso handcuffed Hart, Hart yelled out, “It's
all mine, [Gomes] had nothing to do with it.” Trooper Grasso
escorted Hart to the curb and the troopers secured the firearm, a
.40 caliber Baretta loaded with ten rounds of ammunition. After
he was read his Miranda rights, Hart admitted that the gun was
his and described it in accurate detail.

II. ANALYSIS

As established by the Supreme Court in Terry v. thg, 392

U.S. l, 30 (1968), “an officer may conduct a brief investigatory

stop if he has a reasonable, articulable suspicion that criminal

 

activity is afoot.” United States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71
(1st Cir. 2004). Hart initially argues that the Terry stop was

unreasonable because the basis for the stop was the belief that
Hart was a DYS escapee, and such a belief was incredible. The
Court agrees that the evidence does not support the stop based on
the belief that Hart was one of the DYS escapees.

The evidence, however, demonstrates that the stop was
reasonable based on a concern for officer safety. In Terry, the
Supreme Court established the objective standard for evaluating
whether “the facts available to the officer at the moment of the

seizure or the search ‘warrant a man of reasonable caution in the

 

Gomes's testimony, it does not credit her testimony regarding the
location of the gun. Gomes was not initially forthright with the
Court in her relationship with Hart, and the relationship
established a bias. The Court finds that the gun was located in
plain view between the passenger seat and the door.

5

 

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 6 of 8

belief' that the action taken was appropriate.” lgé at 21-22.
The inquiry into the reasonableness of the suspicion considers
“whether the officer's actions were justified at their inception,
and if so, whether the officer's subsequent actions were fairly
responsive to the emerging tableau - the Circumstances originally
warranting the stop, informed by what occurred, and what the
officer learned, as the stop progressed.” United States v.
Chhien, 266 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2001). A stop is justified at
its inception if the officer can “point to specific and
articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences
from those facts, reasonably warrant [the] intrusion.” Terry,
392 U.S. at 21.

Both parties agree that the stop occurred when Officer
Lavoie asked Gomes to put the car in park and turn off her
engine. Gomes did not testify regarding any of the events
leading up to the stop, While Hart did not fit the description
of any of the fugitives sought by the troopers, Trooper Lavoie
and Trooper Grasso both observed that Hart was hunched over and
held his hand at his waist the entire time he was walking. He
appeared nervous and his body movement was unusual. Based on
these facts, the officers had an articulable suspicion that Hart
carried a concealed weapon. Compare United States v. Wriqht, 582
F.3d 199, 211-13 (1st Cir. 2009) (holding that it was error to

infer that clutching a pocket, standing alone, implies that the

 

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 7 of 8

pocket contains a weapon, but the totality of the circumstances
justified the stop). In securing the area to conduct an
investigation into the missing youths, the reasonable suspicion
that an individual present at the scene carried a concealed
weapon raised a concern for officer safety justifying the initial
stop.

After the initial stop, the troopers became aware that Hart
was a member of the Montes Park gang. Hart's actions continued
to be unusual, he placed his hands on the dash before such a
request was made, and he appeared nervous. The totality of the
circumstances justified the troopers' action in ordering Hart to
leave the car. Upon getting out of the car, Hart's actions drew
Trooper Lavoie's attention to an area of the vehicle where he saw
the handle of a handgun in plain view. “It has long been settled
that objects falling in the plain view of an officer who has a
right to be in the position to have that view are subject to
seizure and may be introduced in evidence.” Harris v. United
States, 390 U.S. 234, 236 (1968). Seizure of the gun did not
violate Hart's Fourth Amendment rights.

Finally, Hart argues that under the Second Amendment, the
basis for his stop cannot be the suspicion of a concealed weapon.
He argues that the Supreme Court in District of Columbia v.
Heller, 128 S. Ct. 2783 (2008), held that the Second Amendment

“conferred an individual right to keep and bear arms,” id. at

 

 

Case 1:O9-cr-10376-WGY Document 29 Filed 07/30/10 Page 8 of 8

2799, and suggests this right extends to the possession of
concealed handguns outside one's home. Heller does not hold, nor
even suggest, that concealed weapons laws are unconstitutional.
Heller held that the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms
is not unlimited. 128 S. Ct. at 2816. Indeed, Heller notes that
“the majority of the 19th-century courts to consider the question
held that prohibitions on carrying concealed weapons were lawful
under the Second Amendment or state analogues.” ld; Moreover,
in McDonald v. Chicago, 130 S. Ct. 3020 (2010), where the Supreme
Court held that the Second Amendment applies to the States
through the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court explained that “[i]n
Heller, we held that the Second Amendment protects the right to
possess a handgun in the home for the purpose of self-defense.”
McDonald, 130 S. Ct. at 3050 (emphasis added). Therefore, it was
not a violation of Hart's Second Amendment rights to stop him on
the basis of the suspicion of a concealed weapon.
III. CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Motion to Suppress [Docket No. 13] was

denied.

ZZZZZLHL»/<i;zaowq

wILLIAM G. Y§fms?/
DISTRICT JUD E

 

