Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 1 of 10                                     PageID #: 172



                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                       DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                              )
                                                      )
                                                      )
v.                                                    )                  Criminal No. 09-152-P-H
                                                      )
                                                      )
MICHAEL PRESSEY,                                      )
                                                      )
                           Defendant                  )




             RECOMMENDED PARTIAL DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


         Michael Pressey, charged with one count of knowingly possessing firearms, namely,

improvised explosive devices qualifying as destructive devices as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a)

and (f), which were not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer

Record, in violation of 26 U.S.C. §§ 5861(d), 5841, 5845(f), and 5871, see Indictment (Docket

No. 18), moves to suppress evidence of his identity, as well as statements that he made to Maine

Drug Enforcement Administration (“MDEA”) agent Jeffrey Calloway on August 17, 2009, on

grounds, inter alia, of his asserted arrest without probable cause and Calloway‟s alleged

questioning of him without benefit of the warning required by Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436

(1966), see Motion To Suppress Evidence (“Motion”) (Docket No. 39) at [1], [12-14].1

         The defendant had raised three other grounds for suppression of evidence: (i) that a

search warrant affidavit did not contain probable cause for a search of the premises located at

1
 Per Miranda, an accused must be advised prior to custodial interrogation “that he has the right to remain silent, that
anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and
that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires.”
Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478-79.


                                                          1
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 2 of 10                    PageID #: 173



240 Park Avenue in Portland, Maine, (ii) that the issuing judge was not authorized to issue a

search warrant, and (iii) that the search exceeded the scope of the warrant. See Motion at [2-12].

By partial ruling dated December 17, 2009, Judge Hornby denied the Motion to the extent

predicated on those three grounds and ordered that the matter be scheduled for an evidentiary

hearing as to the remaining two grounds. See Partial Ruling on Defendant‟s Motion To Suppress

(“Partial Ruling”) (Docket No. 47).

       In accordance with Judge Hornby‟s ruling, an evidentiary hearing was held before me on

the two remaining grounds for suppression on January 13, 2010, at which the defendant appeared

with counsel. The government tendered one witness and otherwise relied on two documents

filed by the defendant in support of his motion, an Affidavit and Request for a Search Warrant

(“Affidavit”) (Docket No. 39-1), and a Search Warrant (Docket No. 39-2). The defendant

neither tendered witnesses nor offered exhibits. At the close of the evidence, counsel for both

sides argued orally. I now recommend that the following findings of fact be adopted and that, as

to the two remaining bases for suppression, the Motion be granted to the extent that the

defendant seeks exclusion of statements made to Calloway in the absence of a Miranda warning,

and otherwise denied.

                                 I. Proposed Findings of Fact

       Calloway, employed by the Portland Police Department, has been assigned for the past

five years to the MDEA. In the summer of 2009, he assisted MDEA agent Cheryl Holmes in a

drug trafficking investigation at 240 Park Avenue in Portland, Maine. Calloway was among the

law-enforcement team that conducted surveillance during controlled purchases of drugs using a

confidential informant, or CI. The defendant was among those observed to have participated in




                                                2
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 3 of 10                                PageID #: 174



drug trafficking during controlled buys by the CI on or about July 24, 2009, and August 16,

2009. See Affidavit, Statement of Probable Cause, ¶¶ 33-37, 52-57.

        On August 17, 2009, agents executed a warrant to search the residence and premises of

240 Park Avenue. The warrant had been issued by a Maine Superior Court Justice on the

strength of an affidavit by Holmes detailing, among other things, observations made during the

July 24 and August 16 controlled buys. See id. Calloway was assigned to attempt to conduct

interviews of any occupant of the premises after a Portland Police Department Special Reaction

Team (“SRT”) had made entry. Prior to August 17, Holmes had informed Calloway that the

defendant lived on the second floor of 240 Park Avenue and that the defendant‟s grandmother

lived on the first floor.

        Calloway waited across the street from 240 Park Avenue while the SRT made its entry.

Some SRT members then exited the apartment, and one gave Calloway the go-ahead to enter.

Calloway walked up a set of stairs to an outside door, which opened into a kitchen. Upon his

entry, he observed two people in handcuffs standing with their backs to the kitchen stove, a black

male whom he recognized as William Hopkins, and a white male who he correctly assumed,

based on the information earlier provided by Holmes, was the defendant. Several uniformed

SRT officers remained in the kitchen, as well.

        Calloway asked the defendant if the apartment was his. The defendant said that it was.2

Calloway then asked the defendant whether a bedroom that he had observed from the kitchen

was his. The defendant said that it was. Calloway asked these questions because he was looking




2
 On direct examination, Calloway testified that he asked whose apartment it was, and the defendant stated that it
was his. However, on cross-examination, Calloway clarified that he addressed this question specifically to the
defendant, asking if the apartment was his.


                                                       3
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 4 of 10                   PageID #: 175



for a more private place to conduct interviews than the kitchen, where armed SRT members

remained.

       Calloway first asked Hopkins to accompany him to the bedroom. Hopkins did so, and

indicated that he did not want to talk to Calloway. After this encounter, which lasted no more

than a few seconds, Calloway returned Hopkins to the kitchen and informed SRT members that

he “can go.” By that, Calloway meant that Hopkins could go to the Cumberland County Jail.

Calloway then asked the defendant to come into the bedroom. The defendant did so. Calloway

asked if the defendant would talk to him, and the defendant stated that he felt that he would be

better served if he had counsel present for that occasion. This ended the conversation, which

lasted no more than a couple of minutes. The defendant returned to the kitchen, and Calloway

told SRT members that he could go as well, again meaning go to jail. Both Hopkins and the

defendant were removed from the apartment and taken to jail. The search of the apartment, in

which Calloway participated, then commenced. Calloway had no further conversation that day

with the defendant.

            During Calloway‟s brief encounter with the defendant, the defendant was cooperative

and polite. At no point did Calloway tell the defendant that he was free to leave or that he was

not under arrest. Nor did Calloway, or any other officer to his knowledge, advise the defendant

of his Miranda rights before the defendant was taken to jail. Calloway agreed that it was fair to

say that the defendant was in custody from the time he was handcuffed upon the SRT‟s entry

into the apartment until the time that he eventually was bailed from jail.

       At the hearing, the parties stipulated that no Miranda warning was given to the defendant

at any time during the above-described encounter.




                                                 4
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 5 of 10                    PageID #: 176



                                          II. Discussion

                                 A. Probable Cause To Arrest

       At oral argument following the close of the evidentiary hearing in this matter, counsel for

the government contended that the Holmes affidavit supplied probable cause to arrest the

defendant prior to the SRT‟s entry into his apartment, just as Judge Hornby ruled it had supplied

probable cause to search his apartment. See Partial Ruling at 2-3. Defense counsel made no

argument that probable cause was lacking, seemingly conceding the point that it existed. In any

event, to the extent that the point is not conceded, I recommend that the court deny the motion to

suppress on this basis. As the government‟s counsel observed, paragraphs 36, 37, 53, and 57 of

Holmes‟ affidavit detail agents‟ contemporaneous observations of the defendant‟s participation

in controlled drug purchases by a CI. See Affidavit, Statement of Probable Cause, ¶¶ 36-37, 53,

57; see also Partial Ruling at 2-3. In the parallel context of the defendant‟s challenge to the

issuance of the search warrant, Judge Hornby rejected his contention that the Holmes affidavit

relied on the uncorroborated statements of an informant of unknown reliability that the defendant

had committed a crime. See Motion at [2-3], [13]; Partial Ruling at 2-3.

       There was probable cause prior to the entry of the defendant‟s apartment on August 17,

2009, to believe that he was engaged in the illegal distribution of cocaine.

                                 B. Lack of Miranda Warning

       “Miranda warnings must be given before a suspect is subjected to „custodial

interrogation.‟” United States v. Taylor, 985 F.2d 3, 7 (1st Cir. 1993). The obligation of an

officer to administer Miranda warnings attaches “only where there has been such a restriction on

a person‟s freedom as to render her „in custody.‟” Stansbury v. California, 511 U.S. 318, 322

(1994) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Whether a person can be considered to



                                                 5
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 6 of 10                      PageID #: 177



have been in custody depends on all of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation, but “the

ultimate inquiry is simply whether there [was] a „formal arrest or restraint on freedom of

movement‟ of the degree associated with a formal arrest.” Id. (citation omitted).

       The determination whether there was such a restraint on freedom of movement hinges

“on the objective circumstances of the interrogation, not on the subjective views harbored by

either the interrogating officers or the person being questioned.” Id. at 323. See also United

States v. Quinn, 815 F.2d 153, 157 (1st Cir. 1987) (relevant inquiry “is how a reasonable man in

the suspect‟s position would have understood his situation”) (citation and internal quotation

marks omitted).

       “Among the factors to consider” in making a Miranda custody determination “are

whether the suspect was questioned in familiar or at least neutral surroundings, the number of

law enforcement officers present at the scene, the degree of physical restraint placed upon the

suspect, and the duration and character of the interrogation.” United States v. Nishnianidze, 342

F.3d 6, 13 (1st Cir. 2003) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

       For Miranda purposes, “„[i]nterrogation‟ includes not only the asking of direct questions

but also means any words or actions on the part of police (other than those normally attendant to

arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating

response from the suspect.” Taylor, 985 F.2d at 7 (citation, footnote and internal punctuation

omitted); see also, e.g., Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 300-01 (1980) (“We conclude that

the Miranda safeguards come into play whenever a person in custody is subjected to either

express questioning or its functional equivalent. That is to say, the term „interrogation‟ under

Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of

the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know



                                                 6
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 7 of 10                    PageID #: 178



are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.”) (footnotes omitted).

By contrast, a voluntary utterance – uncoerced by direct questioning or its functional equivalent

– does not implicate the protections of Miranda. See, e.g., United States v. Shea, 150 F.3d 44, 48

(1st Cir. 1998), recognized as abrogated on other grounds, United States v. Mojica-Baez, 229

F.3d 292 (1st Cir. 2000) (“No evidence suggests that the FBI coerced Shea into making these

statements. Indeed, the record shows that all of these statements were spontaneous utterances,

which we deem to be admissible.”).

       I conclude that the defendant was “in custody” for Miranda purposes when he was

handcuffed upon SRT members‟ entry into his apartment. Police at that point already had

probable cause to arrest him. As Calloway conceded on cross-examination, the defendant was

not free to leave police custody at any time from the point that he was handcuffed until the point

that he was bailed from jail. When Calloway told fellow officers that Hopkins and the defendant

could “go” after his brief discussions with each of them in the bedroom, he meant “go to jail.” A

reasonable person in the defendant‟s shoes, whose apartment had been entered by a team of

uniformed, armed officers on the strength of a search warrant, who had been immediately placed

in handcuffs, and who had been asked to talk to police, would not have considered himself free

to leave. At hearing, counsel for the government argued that the defendant was only temporarily

detained until following the attempted interview, at which point he was placed under arrest.

However, I discern no material difference between the defendant‟s circumstances when he was

first placed in handcuffs and his circumstances, a short time later, when he was released from the

bedroom to be sent to jail.

       In the conceded absence of any Miranda warnings, Calloway directly asked the

defendant two questions, whether the apartment was his and whether the bedroom was his. The



                                                7
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 8 of 10                      PageID #: 179



defendant did not “volunteer” his affirmative responses, as the government suggests, see

Government‟s Objection to Defendant‟s Motion To Suppress (“Objection”) (Docket No. 44) at

13-14. Rather, they were elicited in direct response to Calloway‟s questions.

          At hearing, counsel for the government emphasized that Calloway‟s questions cannot

fairly be characterized as “interrogation,” given that he merely sought to find a suitable interview

space. By this, she may have meant to suggest either that Calloway‟s innocent purpose is

dispositive of the question of Miranda violation and/or that his questions were the sort “normally

attendant to arrest and custody[,]” removing them from the purview of Miranda. Innis, 446 U.S.

at 301.

          Calloway‟s innocent purpose is not dispositive. “The question [of whether an officer‟s

questions are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response in a particular situation] is an

objective one; the officer‟s actual belief or intent is relevant, but it is not conclusive.” United

States v. Doe, 878 F.2d 1546, 1551 (1st Cir. 1989) (emphasis in original); see also, e.g., United

States v. Hendrix, 509 F.3d 362, 374 (7th Cir. 2007) (“[T]he test is whether a reasonable

objective observer would have believed that the law enforcement officer‟s statements to the

defendant were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.”).

          Nor has the government, which bears the burden of proving Miranda compliance, see,

e.g., United States v. Barone, 968 F.2d 1378, 1384 (1st Cir. 1992), made a persuasive case that

Calloway asked the defendant questions normally attendant to arrest and custody. There was no

testimony that it was Calloway‟s usual practice, or the usual practice of police, to ask the sorts of

questions asked of the defendant for the purpose of obtaining interview space.

          My research does disclose that questions as to an individual‟s residence or address

typically do not constitute “interrogation” for Miranda purposes. See, e.g., United States v.



                                                 8
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 9 of 10                                     PageID #: 180



Glover, 211 Fed. Appx. 811, 814 (10th Cir. 2007) (“When an officer asked the occupants if the

house was theirs, Mr. Glover stated the house was his. An inquiry about the residence of a

suspect is one normally attendant to arrest and custody and not subject to Miranda.”) (citation

and internal quotation marks omitted); United States v. Edwards, 885 F.2d 377, 385 (7th Cir.

1989) (“In our opinion questions such as „what is your name?‟ and „where do you live?‟ will not

usually constitute interrogation within the meaning of Miranda.”). Yet, I find no such authority

with respect to the pointed question whether a bedroom within a residence is that individual‟s

bedroom. In any event, any exception to the Miranda rule for questions seeking to elicit “simple

identification information of the most basic sort (e.g., name, address, marital status)” is itself

subject to an exception if such questions are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.

Doe, 878 F.2d at 1551-52.

         In this case, officers had sufficient information, prior to entering the defendant‟s

apartment, to conclude that the apartment likely contained evidence of the commission of a

crime, albeit drug trafficking rather than possession of an improvised explosive device. A

question posed to the defendant as to whether the apartment and/or bedroom were his was

reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.3 See id. The defendant‟s answers to those

questions accordingly should be suppressed.4




3
   The government does not challenge the defendant‟s characterization of his responses as incriminating. See
Objection at 13-14.
4
  In connection with its argument that there was probable cause to arrest the defendant, the government asserted that
the facts of his identity and occupancy of the second floor apartment at 240 Park Avenue were known to agents at
the time of issuance of the search warrant, prior to the defendant‟s arrest. See Objection at 13 n.3. In so noting, the
government assumedly alluded to the so-called “independent source” rule, pursuant to which “evidence acquired by
an untainted [source] which is identical to evidence unlawfully acquired is admissible.” United States v. Siciliano,
578 F.3d 61, 68 (1st Cir. 2009) (citation and internal punctuation omitted). If the court agrees with my
recommendation to suppress information obtained via Calloway‟s questions, the government will be free, should it
so choose, to seek admission of that information through the “independent source” rule.


                                                          9
Case 2:09-cr-00152-DBH Document 55 Filed 02/10/10 Page 10 of 10                    PageID #: 181



                                        III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend, with respect to the two bases for suppression

referred to me for an evidentiary hearing and recommended decision, that the Motion be

GRANTED to the extent that the defendant seeks exclusion of statements made to Calloway in

the absence of Miranda warnings, and otherwise DENIED.



                                            NOTICE


        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within fourteen (14)
days after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for
oral argument before the district judge shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the filing
of the objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review
by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 10th day of February, 2010

                                                     /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                     John H. Rich III
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge




                                                10
