Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 1 of 17                 PageID #: 568



                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                 DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                   )
                                           )
       v.                                  )       CR-06-57-B-W
                                           )
WILLIAM C. BURHOE                          )

     ORDER ON GOVERNMENT’S MOTION FOR AN ORDER PERMITTING THE
      INVOLUNTARY ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION TO RESTORE THE
               DEFENDANT’S COMPETENCY TO STAND TRIAL

       Applying for a second time the Sell factors to William C. Burhoe, the Court concludes

that the Government has proven each factor by clear and convincing evidence. The Court orders

Mr. Burhoe to undergo a regimen of prescribed psychotropic medication to restore his

competency.

I.     STATEMENT OF FACTS

       A.     Background

       The immediate genesis of William C. Burhoe’s long saga with the federal law began on

September 7, 2006, when a federal grand jury indicted him for possession of two firearms after

having been previously committed to a mental institution, an alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. §

922(g)(4). As the charge in the indictment suggests, Mr. Burhoe’s psychological condition

immediately became a central issue, and after a series of motions and orders, the Court held a

Sell hearing on July 7, 2008 to determine whether Mr. Burhoe should be involuntarily medicated.

See Sell v. United States, 539 U.S. 166 (2003). On September 25, 2008, the Court granted the

Government’s motion for involuntary medication of Mr. Burhoe.         Order on Sell Hearing

(Docket # 108) (First Sell Order).
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 2 of 17                                  PageID #: 569



        On April 6, 2009, the Court received a psychiatric report from the Bureau of Prisons,

stating that Mr. Burhoe had undergone a recommended regimen of medication and had been

restored to competency. On May 13, 2009, the Court held a competency hearing. Mr. Burhoe

appeared with counsel and the Court determined, based on Mr. Burhoe’s appearance and on the

psychiatric reports, that Mr. Burhoe had regained competency. The Court arraigned Mr. Burhoe

directly after that hearing. After more than three years, the case was finally placed on a regular

court schedule and began to move forward. Mr. Burhoe filed a motion to suppress and the case

appeared on trial lists. Def.’s Mot. to Suppress Confession (Docket # 133).1

        On July 10, 2009, however, Mr. Burhoe’s counsel filed a motion for a hearing to

determine competency. Def.’s Mot. for Hearing to Determine Competency (Docket # 146)

(Def.’s Mot.). The motion stated that Mr. Burhoe had been examined by Dr. Bruce Kerr, a

clinical psychologist, and that Dr. Kerr had found Mr. Burhoe unable to form a factual and

rational understanding of the proceedings against him and unable to consult with his attorney

about his case on a reasonably rational basis. Id.2 Upon referral by the Court, the Magistrate

Judge held a hearing on July 20, 2009 and on the same day, issued a Recommended Decision in

which she recommended that the Court find Mr. Burhoe incompetent. Recommended Decision.

(Docket # 157). On July 23, 2009, the Court adopted the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation,

concluded that Mr. Burhoe had lapsed back into incompetency, and ordered that Mr. Burhoe be

committed to the custody of the Attorney General for treatment.                          Order Affirming the

Recommended Decision of the Magistrate Judge and Order for Psychiatric or Psychological

Examination (Docket # 159).

1
   Mr. Burhoe’s motion to suppress raises his psychological condition in a different context. The motion questions
whether his statements while in the hospital in police custody were knowing and voluntary and whether he was able
to knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waive Miranda warnings. Def.’s Mot. to Suppress Confession at 1-3.
2
  Mr. Burhoe’s motion misidentifies Dr. Kerr as a medical doctor. Def.’s Mot. at 1. Dr. Kerr is a licensed clinical
psychologist. Tr. of Proceedings at 3:17-18 (Docket # 191) (Tr.)

                                                        2
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 3 of 17                                  PageID #: 570



        After another period of hospitalization, the doctors at the Federal Medical Center in

Butner (Butner) concluded in their report that Mr. Burhoe was incompetent and would likely

regain competence if treated with appropriate psychotropic medication. See Gov’t’s Mot. for an

Order Permitting the Involuntary Administration of Medication to Restore the Def.’s

Competency to Stand Trial (Docket # 171) (Gov’t’s Sell Mot.). Mr. Burhoe again objected to the

recommended course of psychotropic medication.

        On November 16, 2009, the Government moved for a second Sell order to authorize

involuntary medication for Mr. Burhoe. Id. Mr. Burhoe objected. Def.’s Resp. to Gov’t’s Mot.

for an Order Permitting the Involuntary Administration of Medication to Restore the Def.’s

Competency to Stand Trial (Docket # 176). The Court held the second Sell hearing on January 8,

2010. The Court received the testimony of Jill R. Grant, Psy. D.; Bruce R. Berger, M.D.; and

Mr. Burhoe through videoconference.3

        Following the hearing, the Court ordered the parties to produce the report of Dr. Kerr and

to obtain a transcript of the July 20, 2009 hearing before the Magistrate Judge. Order Requesting

the Report of Dr. Bruce B. Kerr and a Transcript of His Testimony During the Competency

Hearing Held on July 20, 2009 (Docket # 189). Mr. Burhoe did not object. Def.’s Resp. to

Court’s Order Requesting Report of Dr. Bruce Kerr and Testimony Transcript of 7/20/09

Competency Hearing (Docket # 190). Dr. Kerr’s report was filed on January 13, 2010 and a

transcript of the July 20, 2009 hearing was filed on January 15, 2010.

        The Court also allowed Mr. Burhoe to keep the record open for two weeks in order to file

medication records from the Somerset County Jail. On January 22, 2010, Mr. Burhoe moved to

extend the time to February 26, 2010. Def.’s Unopposed Mot. to Extend Time for Filing Records


3
 To accord Mr. Burhoe his right to counsel, the Court approved the request of Mr. Burhoe’s counsel to be present in
Butner during the videoconference testimony.

                                                        3
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 4 of 17                   PageID #: 571



in Hearing on Gov’t’s Mot. for Involuntary Medication (Docket # 192). On January 25, 2010,

the Court granted the Defendant’s motion. Order (Docket # 193). On February 4, 2010, Mr.

Burhoe filed a supplemental memorandum, addressing the significance of the Somerset County

medication records. Def.’s Supplemental Mem. on Gov’t’s Mot. for an Order Permitting the

Involuntary Administration of Medicaiton to Restore the Def.’s Competency to Stand Trial

(Docket # 198) (Def.’s Supplemental Mem.). On February 5, 2010, the Government requested a

conference of counsel, which was held on February 22, 2010. Letter to Court (Docket # 199).

       At the February 22, 2010 conference, the Government produced a supplemental affidavit

from Dr. Berger dated February 16, 2010 and asked that the Court receive it into evidence. Mr.

Burhoe objected, saying that the record had closed. Noting that the Court kept the record open at

his request to allow for evidence of medication at the Somerset County Jail, the Court overruled

Mr. Burhoe’s objection since the new Dr. Berger affidavit responded to Mr. Burhoe’s additional

evidence. Although the Court admitted the Dr. Berger affidavit, it ruled that the Court would

keep the record open to allow Mr. Burhoe, if he wished to do so, to cross-examine Dr. Berger

regarding his newly expressed opinions. On March 3, 2010, Mr. Burhoe waived his right to

cross-examine Dr. Berger and moved to close the record on the Sell hearing. Def.’s Mot. for

Waiver of Cross-examination of Dr. Berger and Closure of Sell Hearing (Docket # 207). The

Government did not oppose this motion. On March 4, 2010, the Court granted Mr. Burhoe’s

motion to close the Sell hearing. Order (Docket # 209).

       B.     Dr. Kerr’s Opinion

       To piece together what happened between the spring of 2009 and the winter of 2010, the

Court begins with the competency hearing of May 13, 2009. When Mr. Burhoe appeared before

the Court on May 13, 2009, he had undergone a lengthy period of intensive psychotropic



                                               4
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 5 of 17                   PageID #: 572



therapy. Based on the Court’s observations, and the conclusions in the expert reports, he seemed

fully competent. Later that spring, Dr. Kerr, a clinical psychologist for the defense, met twice

with Mr. Burhoe. On June 18, 2009, Dr. Kerr had found Mr. Burhoe to be “quietly cautious and

suspicious,” but Mr. Burhoe had not shown “the frank agitation and hostility that he

demonstrated at the second meeting eleven days later.” Report of Bruce B. Kerr, Ph.D. at 2.

       On June 29, 2009, however, when Dr. Kerr met with Mr. Burhoe again, Mr. Burhoe had

markedly deteriorated.    Dr. Kerr’s report states that Mr. Burhoe was “quite agitated and

paranoid. His thoughts were racing and his speech was rapid, angry, pressured, ranting, and at

times difficult to follow. He was obsessed with his legal representation . . . .” Id. at 1. Dr.

Kerr’s report suggests that Mr. Burhoe’s condition had deteriorated despite the fact he was still

taking the prescribed psychotropic medication. Id. at 2. He thought that Mr. Burhoe’s mental

condition “may be quite variable” and predicted that it might be “difficult . . . to know on any

given occasion what his mental condition will be like.” Id. at 3. He surmised that the variability

“may have some correlation with the degree of stress that he is under, as well as his medication

compliance and the natural rhythms of his own severe mental illness.” Id. Dr. Kerr testified at

the competency hearing on July 20, 2009 in a manner generally consistent with his report. Tr.

       C.      The Second Sell Hearing

       During her testimony at the January 8, 2010 Sell hearing, Dr. Jill Grant reviewed Mr.

Burhoe’s history. She noted that after the Court issued the first Sell order on September 25,

2008, Mr. Burhoe did not want to take the medicine, but he agreed to do so when apprised of the

court order. Over time, Mr. Burhoe responded well to the medication, a course of Risperdal; he

became less hostile and irritable, he talked rationally, and by March 2009, he had no psychiatric




                                                5
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 6 of 17                    PageID #: 573



symptoms at all.4 On March 9, 2009, Dr. Grant co-authored a forensic evaluation that concluded

that “Mr. Burhoe’s competency has been restored with medication.” Gov’t’s Hearing Ex. 6 at 6

(Docket # 188).

           By the time he was readmitted to Butner in August 2009, Mr. Burhoe’s condition had

changed. He was not taking his medication and he was unpredictable. At times calm, he was

intermittently irritable and hostile. Dr. Grant testified that he was ultimately placed in a secure

unit due to concern for staff safety. The diagnosis continued to be paranoid schizophrenia and

Dr. Grant opined that Mr. Burhoe had no insight into his mental illness. She said that, as before,

the treatment of choice is psychotropic medication, which has proven beneficial in the past. She

noted that when compliant with his medication regimen, Mr. Burhoe had not complained of side

effects and had no other complaints. Dr. Grant acknowledged that when Mr. Burhoe was not

taking the medicine, he objected to taking it, and complained that it made him feel sluggish, but

she said that he made no similar complaints when taking the medicine.

           Dr. Berger confirmed Mr. Burhoe’s paranoid schizophrenia diagnosis and he expressed

the opinion that anti-psychotic medicine is essential for effective treatment. He agreed that

“talking therapy” could be useful but only as an adjunct to medication. He said the only

alternatives to medication were continued confinement and enduring psychiatric symptoms. Dr.

Berger agreed that Mr. Burhoe had responded well to the last round of psychotropic therapy,

except that he had little insight about his illness and his need for treatment. Dr. Berger also

echoed Dr. Grant’s observation that Mr. Burhoe did not complain about the side-effects of the

medicine when he was taking it but complained of numbness, sluggishness, and urinary retention

when he was not. Dr. Berger conceded that given a choice, Mr. Burhoe would likely not take



4
    Risperdal, a trade name, is also referred to as risperidone.

                                                              6
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 7 of 17                    PageID #: 574



any medicine because Mr. Burhoe does not believe he has a psychiatric condition that requires

medication, and if not required to take medicine, he will probably stop.

       After the doctors testified and left the hearing room, Mr. Burhoe testified. Mr. Burhoe

said that he disagreed with the doctors’ medication recommendations. He said the Risperdal did

not help his thought processes; instead, the medicine troubled his heart, blurred his vision, gave

him internal soreness, and made him feel generally miserable inside. He also said that he had

experienced other side effects, including a weakness in his heart muscles, other muscular issues,

sore urination, constipation, dry throat, diminished mental capacity, and a tendency to chew his

tongue raw. He testified that he was prescribed another drug that he referred to as “cogenic” to

alleviate tongue chewing. When he was taking the Risperdal, he said all he wanted to do was to

go to bed and pray for the end of his suffering. He acknowledged that he had not complained

because he thought the staff at Butner had too much to do. However, the stress from taking the

medicine increased as time went on.

       Mr. Burhoe said that the custodial move from North Carolina to Maine was terrible. He

was taken from state to state and placed in a variety of facilities on his way north: Virginia,

Philadelphia, Brooklyn, New Hampshire, Portland, and Bangor. He was placed in the midst of

criminals and described the experience as terrifying.

       Mr. Burhoe insisted that he is currently competent to stand trial, to assist his attorney in

his defense, and to make decisions. He said that he had stopped taking Risperdal only one week

before arriving back at Butner in early August: so in effect, the July determination of

incompetence occurred when he was taking the medicine. Over the last month, during which he

has not taken the medicine, he feels much better and has gotten “good relief.”




                                                7
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 8 of 17                      PageID #: 575



           Left open was whether Mr. Burhoe had, in fact, continued to take psychotropic medicine

during the late spring and summer of 2009 as he lapsed into psychological difficulty. If he had

stopped, there would be a more obvious link between his cessation of the medication and his

mental deterioration; if he had continued to take risperidone and still deteriorated, there would be

a question as to whether the medicine was effective in remitting his symptoms. The records

submitted after the hearing by Mr. Burhoe confirm that he continued to take the prescribed

medicine even during the time he decompensated. Def.’s Supplemental Mem. Ex. 1-4.

           Dr. Berger’s affidavit dated February 16, 2010 responded to this new information. Aff. of

Dr. Bruce R. Berger, Gov’t Ex. 9. Dr. Berger explained that after the Court’s September 25,

2008 Order, Mr. Burhoe was administered 2 mg per day of risperidone, which he described as

“at the low end of the dosing range.” Id. ¶ 3. Assuming Mr. Burhoe continued to take

risperidone in the recommended dose from June to August, 2009, Dr. Berger said his opinion

remained unchanged. Id. ¶ 4. Dr. Berger explained that Mr. Burhoe’s medication needs

           can change depending on a number of variables. Those variables can include the
           setting in which the patient is in, the anxiety or stress that a patient is
           experiencing, and the patient’s acclimation to a certain dose of medication. A
           patient may require a higher or lower dose of medication or a different
           medication.

Id. ¶ 5.

II.        DISCUSSION

           A.     The Sell Factors

           Under Sell, the Court must consider four factors before ordering the involuntary

medication of a defendant: (1) the court must find “important governmental interests are at

stake”; (2) the court must conclude that “involuntary medication will significantly further those

concomitant state interests”; (3) the court must conclude that “involuntary medication is



                                                   8
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 9 of 17                     PageID #: 576



necessary to further those interests”; and, (4) the court must conclude that “administration of the

drugs is medically appropriate, i.e., in the patient’s best medical interest in light of his medical

condition.” 539 U.S. at 180-81 (emphasis in original).

       B.      Washington v. Harper

       The Supreme Court emphasized, however, that before proceeding to this analysis, courts

should consider whether forced medication is warranted “for a different purpose, such as the

purposes set out in Harper related to the individual’s dangerousness, or purposes related to the

individual’s own interests where refusal to take drugs puts his health gravely at risk.” Id. at 181-

82 (referring to Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210 (1990)). In Harper, the Supreme Court

found constitutional a Washington state policy that allows prison officials to administer

medication to inmates against their will if a psychiatrist determines that the inmates need the

medication and the inmates suffer from a mental disorder and are gravely disabled or present a

likelihood of serious harm to themselves, others, or their property. Harper, 494 U.S. at 215.

Despite Dr. Grant’s testimony that Mr. Burhoe had been moved to a secure unit out of concern

for staff safety, the doctors’ November 9, 2009 report states that “[b]ecause he can be safely

managed on an open mental health housing unit and is not considered to be gravely disabled or

an imminent risk of danger to others due to mental illness, he does not meet criteria for

involuntary treatment pursuant to the Harper criteria.” Gov’t’s Hearing Ex. 7 at 6. The Court

accepts this expert conclusion.

       C.      Burden of Proof

       In its earlier Sell order, in the absence of First Circuit authority, the Court imposed the

burden on the Government to prove each Sell criterion by clear and convincing evidence based

on United States v. Gomes, 387 F.3d 157, 160 (2d Cir. 2004). Although the First Circuit has not



                                                 9
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 10 of 17                                        PageID #: 577



 yet addressed the appropriate burden of proof for a Sell order, other circuits have joined the

 Second Circuit and adopted the clear and convincing standard. See United States v. Fazio, No.

 08-3900, 2010 WL 724664, at *4 (8th Cir. Mar. 4, 2010); United States v. Bush, 585 F.3d 806,

 814 (4th Cir. 2009); United States v. Grape, 549 F.3d 591, 604 (3d Cir. 2008); United States v.

 Green, 532 F.3d 538, 545 (6th Cir. 2008); United States v. Bradley, 417 F.3d 1107, 1114 (10th

 Cir. 2005). The Court places the burden on the Government to prove each Sell criterion by clear

 and convincing evidence.5

          D.       The First Sell Criterion: Important Governmental Interests

          In its September 25, 2008 Sell Order, the Court reviewed this criterion and concluded that

 the Government had established by clear and convincing evidence an important governmental

 interest. First Sell Order at 13-15. Although the length of time Mr. Burhoe has remained in

 custody has increased, the facts underpinning the governmental interests remain substantially

 unchanged. Those facts include 1) the seriousness of the charge and potential penalties; 2) the

 uncertainty of the Guideline calculation; and 3) the pending state charges arising out of the same

 incident that brought about the federal charge. Id. at 13-15.                       To reiterate the allegations

 surrounding Mr. Burhoe’s arrest in June 2006, Mr. Burhoe allegedly fired a rifle at a state

 trooper and ultimately was shot by the police, and there are state charges pending for aggravated

 attempted murder and reckless conduct with a firearm. Id. at 15. Further, the indictment alleges

 that Mr. Burhoe had previously been involuntarily committed to a mental institution.

 Accordingly, consistent with its earlier Order, the Court finds that the Government has


 5
   The clear and convincing standard of proof applies only to factual findings, and the Second, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
 Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Circuits have concluded that the first Sell criterion is a legal, not a factual question. Fazio,
 2010 WL 724664 at *4; Green, 532 F.3d at 551; United States v. Hernandez-Vasquez, 513 F.3d 908, 915-16 (9th
 Cir. 2008); United States v. Palmer, 507 F.3d 300, 303 (5th Cir. 2007); United States v. Evans, 404 F.3d 227, 236
 (4th Cir. 2005); Bradley, 417 F.3d at 1113-14; Gomes, 387 F.3d at 160. The First Circuit has not yet addressed this
 question. Although the circuit trend seems clear, rather than guess what the First Circuit might rule, the Court has
 applied a clear and convincing standard of proof to the first factor to the extent it has made factual findings.

                                                           10
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 11 of 17                                   PageID #: 578



 established by clear and convincing evidence an important governmental interest in Mr.

 Burhoe’s case.

         E.       Second Sell Criterion: Whether Involuntary Treatment Will Significantly
                  Further the Governmental Interests

         In addition to the Court’s findings in its earlier Sell order, the Court now has evidence

 that the earlier period of mandated anti-psychotic medication was effective in alleviating Mr.

 Burhoe’s psychological symptoms. Unlike the evidence at the prior Sell hearing, when the

 mental health professionals were predicting what was likely to happen if Mr. Burhoe underwent

 a course of psychotropic therapy, Drs. Grant and Berger base their current recommendations on

 what did happen: Mr. Burhoe actually responded to the medication. If the Court accepts the

 testimony of the government professionals, the Court would readily conclude that Mr. Burhoe’s

 past recovery is likely to recur with the same treatment.

         Mr. Burhoe emphatically disagrees. First, Mr. Burhoe emphasizes the horrible side

 effects he experienced while taking the medicine. Second, he challenges the effectiveness of the

 Risperdal. Mr. Burhoe observes that he continued to take Risperdol from 2008 until just before

 returning to Butner in August 2009, so he was fully medicated in June and July 2009 when Dr.

 Kerr and the Court found him incompetent.                  Moreover, despite the fact he has not taken

 Risperdal since arriving at Butner in August 2009, Mr. Burhoe testified in a clear and lucid

 fashion at the January 8, 2010 Sell hearing.

         Based on the Somerset County Jail records, the Court concludes that during the period he

 deteriorated mentally, Mr. Burhoe continued to take the prescribed medication at the Somerset

 County Jail at the recommended dose of 2 mg daily.6 This conclusion, however, does not

 resolve whether the Court should order Mr. Burhoe to reinstitute the medication regimen

 6
  Mr. Burhoe skipped some doses, but there is no evidence that his missed medication played a significant role in his
 deterioration.

                                                         11
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 12 of 17                     PageID #: 579



 recommended by the Butner doctors. Even if Mr. Burhoe became incompetent despite the

 medication, the record establishes that the medication initially restored him to competency.

 Similarly, the record confirms that absent medication, Mr. Burhoe might never regain

 competency to stand trial (he did not become competent for the two years he was not medicated

 prior to the previous Sell order). Dr. Kerr and Dr. Berger agree that Mr. Burhoe’s mental health

 is subject to fluctuations, even when he is medicated: Dr. Kerr described “windows of

 competency” and Dr. Berger explained that Mr. Burhoe’s response to the medication depended

 upon a number of variables.        Based on the experts’ testimony, the solution should be

 recalibration of medication, not its cessation. The initial success of the medication convinces the

 Court that Mr. Burhoe would benefit from another round.

        The Court is concerned about Mr. Burhoe’s vivid assertions that he experiences physical

 pain while on the recommended medicine, but it does not know quite what to make of them. At

 the competency hearing on May 13, 2009, Mr. Burhoe mentioned several physical complaints

 that he attributed to the risperidone, including feeling miserable, sensing that his tongue was

 swollen and sore, having stomach pain, and being tired midday. At the same time, he said that

 the medication did not affect his mental processes. He reiterated these and other more dramatic

 physical sequelae from the medication during the January 8, 2010 Sell hearing. Drs. Grant and

 Berger opined that his recitation of physical symptoms is consistent with his underlying

 psychiatric disease. Be that as it may, the Court remains troubled that Mr. Burhoe feels that the

 risperidone causes him physical discomfort and urges the Butner mental health professionals to

 monitor Mr. Burhoe and act to alleviate any physical side effects from the risperidone.

        In sum, the Court concludes that the Government has proven the second Sell prong by

 clear and convincing evidence.



                                                 12
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 13 of 17                     PageID #: 580



        F.      Third Sell Criterion: Whether Involuntary Medication Is Necessary to
                Further Those Interests

        In its earlier Order, the Court discussed this issue and it adopts for purposes of this

 decision paragraphs one through three of that discussion. First Sell Order at 17-18. Based on

 the testimony of Dr. Berger, the Court determines that “talk therapy” and other less invasive

 alternative forms of treatment will not be effective in treating Mr. Burhoe’s paranoid

 schizophrenia. Sell, 539 U.S. at 181 (stating that the court “must find that any alternative, less

 intrusive treatments are unlikely to achieve substantially the same results”).

        The description of the forcible administration of Risperdal is disturbing. First Sell Order

 at 18. However, based on Mr. Burhoe’s response to the first Sell order and his testimony on

 January 8, 2010, the Court anticipates that Mr. Burhoe will again voluntarily submit to the

 medication regimen and the Butner personnel will not be required to forcefully administer the

 medication.

        Finally, the Sell Court encourages courts to exercise the least amount of judicial authority

 necessary to encourage defendants to accept prescribed medication without physically forcing

 them to ingest the medicine. Sell, 539 U.S. at 181 (stating that the court “must consider less

 intrusive means for administering the drugs, e.g., a court order to the defendant backed by the

 contempt power”). In compliance with Sell, the Court considered issuing an order backed by the

 contempt power as a less forceful exercise of judicial authority. However, the Order in this case

 will likely have the same effect as an order backed by the contempt power since Mr. Burhoe has

 indicated that he will abide by a court order and take the medicine. If Mr. Burhoe changes his

 mind and refuses to take the prescribed medicine, this Order will become necessary. The Court

 concludes that the Government has proven the third Sell criterion by clear and convincing

 evidence.

                                                  13
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 14 of 17                     PageID #: 581



        G.      Fourth Sell Criteria:          Whether Involuntary Medication is Medically
                Appropriate

        Based on the testimony at the second Sell hearing and taking into account the contents of

 the earlier Sell order, the Court concludes that the Government has proven the fourth Sell

 criterion by clear and convincing evidence.

        H.      Other Considerations

                1.     Limited Alternatives

        Mr. Burhoe views the question of whether he should be forced to take a psychotropic

 medication against his will as a matter of “basic human dignity”:

        Mr. Burhoe honored the Court’s order to take the Risperdal (somewhat heroically,
        given the circumstances). In fairness, the government and the Court now owe Mr.
        Burhoe the basic human dignity of being able to choose between his present
        mental state and Risperdal’s misery.

 Def.’s Mot. for Waiver at 3. The Court is keenly sensitive to Mr. Burhoe’s right of privacy and

 respectful of his wish to maintain the integrity of his own body. But the resolution of this motion

 is not so simple.

        First, there is the inescapable fact of a pending federal charge against Mr. Burhoe and this

 charge must ultimately be resolved. Absent a motion to dismiss from the prosecutor, Mr. Burhoe

 must be restored to competency. Even though Mr. Burhoe demonstrates a degree of competency

 while unmedicated, the history of this case reveals that when unmedicated, he becomes

 unpredictable, suspicious, and paranoid.       It is true that even when medicated Mr. Burhoe

 periodically displays symptoms of paranoid schizophrenia.           Although acknowledging these

 difficulties, the goal must be to restore Mr. Burhoe to competency for long enough to allow the

 criminal case to run its course. If the Court were able to conclude that there was a way to




                                                  14
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 15 of 17                     PageID #: 582



 accomplish this result without medication, it would do so, but the history of this case has

 demonstrated precisely the opposite.

        Second, although Mr. Burhhoe demands in evocative language to be left alone, it is

 unlikely that this is a realistic alternative. If the federal charge were to disappear tomorrow, he

 would still face serious state criminal charges, and the state criminal justice system would be

 required to address exactly the same questions of competency and involuntary administration of

 medication that this Court is currently facing.

        Third, if the Court rejects the Government’s motion for involuntary medication, the next

 step could well be a proceeding for hospitalization under 18 U.S.C. § 4246. The Court will not

 speculate what the final result of such a proceeding would be, but the statute authorizes

 commitment for such period of time that a defendant is “suffering from a mental disease or

 defect as a result of which his release would create a substantial risk of bodily injury to another

 or serious damage to property of another.” 18 U.S.C. § 4246(d). If the Government were able to

 demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that Mr. Burhoe meets these criteria, he could face

 a prolonged psychiatric hospitalization.

        Among the alternatives, the Court concludes that a renewed period of risperidone in an

 effort to restore competency is the path most likely to accord Mr. Burhoe his human dignity.

                2.      Continuity of Care Issues

        One intractable question is what happens to Mr. Burhoe once he is restored to

 competency. There are two sub-issues: travel and continuity of care. Butner is in North Carolina

 and the district court is in Bangor, Maine, and Mr. Burhoe must travel up the east coast to face

 further legal proceedings. If he is gradually transported from prison to prison on his way from

 Butner to Bangor, Mr. Burhoe runs the risk of psychologically deteriorating because it is difficult



                                                   15
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 16 of 17                    PageID #: 583



 to maintain proper doses of prescriptive medication as he moves from place to place and because

 being dropped overnight into unfamiliar prisons during the trip is unsettling. Once he regains

 competence, the Court expects counsel to immediately inform the Court so that a conference can

 be scheduled to discuss how best to bring Mr. Burhoe to Maine.

        Once Mr. Burhoe arrives in Maine, it will be essential for Mr. Burhoe to maintain

 continuity of care to minimize the possibility that he will slide back into incompetency. The

 Court urges counsel to consult with appropriate treatment providers and to be prepared to present

 a professionally-reviewed protocol for maintaining Mr. Burhoe’s medication regimen and for

 according him psychiatric and psychological oversight when he returns to Maine.

                3.     Delay

        The Court is also increasingly concerned about the length of time this process has taken.

 Mr. Burhoe has now been under indictment for over three years, and he has only been arraigned;

 for much of this time he has been detained at Butner. Even when he is restored to competency, it

 is unlikely his case will be resolved quickly: his May 28, 2009 motion to suppress remains

 pending, the resolution of which must await his return to competency and to Maine.

        Underlying this extended process, however, is the allegation that Mr. Burhoe’s firearm

 possession was not benign. To the contrary, Mr. Burhoe is alleged to have had a history of

 violence involving firearms, and the circumstances of his arrest on June 6, 2006 suggest that he

 represents a danger to himself and others. See First Sell Order at 15. The Court’s concern about

 this extended process is mitigated to some extent by the seriousness of these allegations. But the

 Court is anxious that the parties, including the mental health professionals, move with as much

 dispatch as possible to institute the psychotherapy and to restore Mr. Burhoe to competence.

        I.      Summary



                                                16
Case 1:06-cr-00057-JAW Document 209 Filed 03/09/10 Page 17 of 17                   PageID #: 584



          Based on the evidence at the second Sell hearing and the history of this case, the Court

 finds that the Government has established by clear and convincing evidence each of the Sell

 criteria. As in the past, the Court does not take lightly an order compelling Mr. Burhoe to

 undergo a treatment regimen to which he objects. Despite Mr. Burhoe’s earnest objections, the

 Court remains convinced that for Mr. Burhoe to truly regain competence, it is essential that he

 submit to a second round of psychotropic therapy. Once he has been restored to competence, the

 Court urges the professionals at Butner and the attorneys in this case, both for the Government

 and Defense, to act quickly so that further necessary proceedings can take place within Mr.

 Burhoe’s window of regained competence and this long-delayed case can be fully and finally

 resolved.

 III.     CONCLUSION

          The Court GRANTS the Government’s Motion for an Order Permitting the Involuntary

 Administration of Medication to Restore the Defendant’s Competency to Stand Trial (Docket #

 171). The Defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the Attorney General for an

 additional period of 120 days pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 4241(d) for treatment consistent with this

 Order.

          SO ORDERED.




                                              /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                              JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                              CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


 Dated this 9th day of March, 2010




                                                 17
