UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND

 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
V. C.r. NO. 08-141$

CARLOS ROBERTO RODAS

\_/`_/\./\./\/vv

 

M
WILLIAM E. SMITH, United States District Judge.

In this drug-conspiracy case, Defendant Carlos Roberto
Rodas moves to sever his trial from that of his co-defendants
and to have a bench trial. For the reasons stated herein, the
Court denies Defendant's motions.

The Supreme Court has noted that “[t]here is a preference

in the federal system for joint trials of defendants who are

 

indicted together.” Zafiro v. United States, 506 U.S. 534, 537
(1993). Furthermore, severance “is especially disfavored” in
conspiracy cases. United States v. Celestin, 612 F.3d 14, 19

 

(lst Cir. 2010) (quoting United States v. Peia-Lora, 225 F.3d

 

17, 34 (lst Cir. 2000)). Therefore, severance is Warranted
“only if there is a serious risk that a joint trial would
compromise a specific trial right of one of the defendants, or
prevent the jury from making a reliable judgment about guilt or
innocence.” §d;_ (quoting Zafiro, 506 U.S. at 539) (internal

quotation omitted).

Defendant first argues that severance is appropriate
because his trial strategy is antagonistic to those of his co-
defendants. Specifically, Defendant asserts that his defense at
trial will be that his co-defendants were involved. in 21 drug
conspiracy, but that he was in the United States on legitimate
business. During the hearing on the motion to sever, Defendant
also raised. the possibility' that he would testify cmi his own
behalf, which he said would in essence turn him into a witness
for the government.

Severance is appropriate when “defenses are so

irreconcilable as to involve fundamental disagreement over core

 

and basic facts.” United States v. Tejeda, 481 F.3d 44, 55 (1st
Cir. 2007) (emphasis in original) (quoting Pena-Lora, 225 F.3d
at 34). Furthermore, “[t]he tension between defenses must be so

great that a jury would have to believe one defendant at the

expense of the other.” United States v. Smith, 46 F.3d 1223,

 

1230 (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting United States v. Yefsky, 994 F.2d

 

885, 897 (lst Cir. 1993)).

Here, the defenses, as far as Defendant has proffered them
to be, are not fundamentally at odds with one another. The jury
could very well believe that Defendant Rodas was in the United
States on business, and that his co-defendants were similarly
not guilty' of the charged conspiracy. Defendant's statement

during the hearing to the effect that he may testify on his own

behalf is similarly' not sufficient to require severance. At
this juncture, the Court does not believe that the defenses are
so at odds with one another as to require severance. However,
the Court is aware of its “continuing duty at all stages of the
trial to grant a severance if prejudice [] appear[s],” United
States v. Rose, 104 F.3d 1408, 1415-16 (1st Cir. 1997) (quoting

Schaffer v. United States, 362 U.S. 511, 516 (1960)), and will

 

sever the trials if such prejudice becomes apparent.

Defendant next asserts that he is entitled to severance
because he believes his co-defendant, Ervin Figueroa, will offer
exculpatory testimony on his behalf. In response to this
argument, the Court suggested at a hearing that a dual jury may
be appropriate to allow for the presentation of such exculpatory
evidence. To that end, the Court directed Defendant to submit a
supplemental memorandum on the issue of empanelling dual juries
and an affidavit specifying' what testimony could. be expected
from the co-defendant. The Court also directed responsive
briefing by the other defendants and the government.

Although Defendant did file a memorandum on the issue, he
failed to submit the requested affidavit. In addition, the
Court has since received a letter from the government indicating
that Defendant Ervin Figueroa's counsel authorized it to
communicate to the Court that Figueroa will not be testifying on

behalf of Rodas. In light of this information, it is clear to

the Court that Defendant has failed to plead sufficient facts or
provide the Court with sufficient evidence to demonstrate that
he is entitled to a separate trial for purposes of presenting

co-defendant testimony. See United States v. Catalan-Roman, 585

 

F.3d 453, 461 (1st Cir. 2009) (setting forth the analysis a
district court must employ in deciding a motion for severance on
the purported need for co-defendant testimony) (citing United

States v. Drougas, 748 F.2d 8, 19 (1st Cir. 1984)).

 

Defendant's final argument is that a severed trial is
necessary to avoid prejudicial spillover evidence. In light of
the nature of the case, this argument has no merit. As the
First Circuit has stated, in a conspiracy case, “‘virtually all
the evidence relating to the other conspirators [is] also
directly' relevant to, and, therefore, independently' admissible
in, the prosecution’s case against’ the defendant requesting

severance.” United. States v. Saunders, 553 F.3d 81, 85 (1st

 

Cir. 2009) (quoting United States v. Flores-Rivera, 56 F.3d 319,

 

325-26 (1st Cir. 1995)). Further, “[w]here evidence featuring
one defendant is independently admissible against a codefendant,

the latter cannot convincingly complain of an improper spillover

 

effect/’ Saunders, 553 F.3d at 85 (quoting United States v.
O'Bryant, 998 F.Zd 21, 26 (lst Cir. 1993)). Given that the

majority of the evidence against Rodas’s co-defendants is also

admissible against Rodas, the Court does not believe Rodas will

be prejudiced in a joint trial beyond what may be cured by jury
instructions. Because it is apparent that severance is not
appropriate in this case, there is similarly no need to empanel
two juries.

In a separate motion pending before this Court, Defendant
seeks to waive his right to a jury trial. However, the
government has not consented to a bench trial, and therefore,
under` Rule 23(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure,l
Defendant must proceed to a jury trial.

For the reasons set forth above, the Court DENIES Defendant
Carlos Roberto Rodas's motion. to sever and motion. for judge
alone trial.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

William E. Smith
United States District Judge

Date: l,/‘,l/’©

 

l Rule 23(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure states:

Jury Trial. If the defendant is entitled to
a jury trial, the trial must be by jury
unless:

(1) the defendant waives a jury' trial

in writing;

(2) the government consents; and

(3) the court approves.

5

