                                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                      DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                            )
                                                     )
v.                                                   )                 Criminal No. 10-82-P-S
                                                     )
ROY CLARK,                                           )
                                                     )
                 Defendant                           )


                   RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS


        Roy Clark, charged with possessing nine firearms in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(8)

and 924(a)(2), see Indictment (Docket No. 31), seeks to suppress statements that he characterizes

as involuntary and/or given in asserted violation of his rights pursuant to Miranda v. Arizona,

384 U.S. 436 (1966), see Motion To Suppress and Dismiss (“Motion To Suppress”) (Docket No.

40) at 1.1 He further seeks to suppress, as fruit of the poisonous tree, additional evidence

gathered as a result of these asserted violations. See id.

        An evidentiary hearing was held before me on August 17, 2010, at which the defendant

appeared with counsel. The government tendered two witness and offered two exhibits, which

were admitted without objection. The defendant tendered no witnesses and offered no exhibits.

After both sides rested, counsel for each argued orally. I now recommend that the following

findings of fact be adopted and that the Motion To Suppress be denied.




1
  Pursuant to Miranda, an accused must be advised prior to custodial interrogation “that he has the right to remain
silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an
attorney, and that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so
desires.” Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478-79.


                                                         1
                                 I. Proposed Findings of Fact

       At approximately 2:45 a.m. on February 15, 2010, the South Portland Police Department

(“SPPD”) received a report of a domestic dispute between Roy Clark, the defendant, and his wife

at their residence on Washington Avenue. When police reported to the residence, they were

unable to locate the defendant, but they observed several guns. They did not then seize them,

learning only later that morning that the defendant was prohibited, by virtue of the entry of a

protection from abuse order against him, from possessing them.

       At approximately 7:00 a.m., the SPPD mobilized several officers starting their shifts to

pursue the case by locating the defendant, arresting him, and seizing guns believed to belong to

him. Among these were Detective Sergeant Kevin Webster, a 23-year veteran of the SPPD, and

police officer Kevin Battle, a 25-year veteran of the SPPD. At 9:30 a.m., several officers

returned to the defendant‟s residence. They did not find him there, but they located and seized

eight to 11 long firearms. One of the defendant‟s relatives informed them that there were other

firearms, all handguns. However, officers were unable to locate those guns.

       At about 11:20 a.m., Battle stopped the defendant‟s vehicle, arrested him, and transported

him to the SPPD station.      Battle and another officer, Sergeant Tom Simons, brought the

defendant to an interview room, where they removed his handcuffs. The room, which was

approximately 10 feet by 12 feet, contained bare walls, chairs, a round table in the center, and a

videocamera that recorded the ensuing interview. That tape was introduced into evidence,

without objection, as Gov‟t Exh. 1 (“Interview Room DVD”).

       At 11:23 a.m., Webster, who was in charge of the defendant‟s case insofar as it

concerned the prohibited possession of firearms, commenced interviewing him, with the primary

goal of locating the missing handguns. Battle and/or Simons were present in the interview room



                                                2
with the defendant for periods of time, including after Webster departed at 12:06 p.m. At the

outset, Webster read the defendant each of his Miranda rights. The defendant told Webster that

he understood each. He did not state that he wished to invoke any of those rights, and Webster

began asking questions.

        Webster soon moved to the subject of the whereabouts of the handguns. The defendant

initially denied that there were any guns in the house, that he personally possessed any guns, or

that he had removed any guns. At approximately 11:33 a.m., after acknowledging, in response to

a question, that he knew that he was not allowed to have any guns, but again denying that he had

any, he stated: “I guess this is where I have to stop and ask for a lawyer, I guess.” Interview

Room DVD at 11:32:52. At the same time as the defendant uttered the words “and ask for a

lawyer, I guess,” Webster spoke over him in a louder tone of voice, stating: “Well, here‟s where

I will just be honest with you and tell you what we‟re going to do. I was just looking for some

honesty from you, and I was not going to put the screws to you.” Id. at 11:32:59.

        Webster heard the defendant say, “I guess this is where I have to stop . . . .” But he did

not hear the rest of that sentence. Nor did he hear it upon initially reviewing the videotape. Only

after the defendant alleged that he had asked for a lawyer, and Webster viewed that portion of the

tape several times with the Assistant United States Attorney, did he hear the remaining words.

He now acknowledges that the defendant stated: “I guess this is where I have to stop and ask for

a lawyer, I guess.”2 While Webster heard the defendant say, “I guess this is where I have to

stop,” he did not understand that phrase to be an invocation of the defendant‟s right to remain

silent. The following exchange immediately ensued:


2
  Webster‟s testimony that he did not hear the defendant utter the word “lawyer” is credible. The defendant
happened to be dropping his voice at the same time as Webster raised his. The words, “and ask for a lawyer, I
guess,” are virtually inaudible.


                                                     3
               Webster: What I will do is, the guns that we did get, we will run a DNA
       check on them. My guess is your DNA‟s going to be on them. You‟re going to
       be charged, which wasn‟t my goal here, alright? My 23 years I‟ve been doing
       this, and I don‟t like being dicked around. A little honesty goes a long way, OK?

                                               ***

              Webster: That‟s all I have is my word, and if I tell you I‟m going to do
       something, I‟m going to do it. Right now, here‟s the way I look at it. You have
       two options . . . . Do you necessarily want to be charged with a gun offense?

               Defendant: No, of course not.

               Webster: Then if you don‟t, this is what I will offer you. Do you see that
       right there (pointing to the videocamera)?

               Defendant: Mm-hmm.

               Webster: We‟re being recorded. So it‟s not like I‟m going to trick-fuck
       you or lie to you. If you tell me where the guns are, I will not charge you with
       being a prohibited person. We will take the guns and hold them here, OK? We‟re
       not stealing them. We‟re not going to keep them. We will keep them here until
       this protection order stuff is done. When you have the right to have the guns
       back, we will give them back to you.

Id. at 11:33:06.

        Webster believed that he possessed the authority and discretion to refrain from charging

the defendant with unlawful possession of the guns.           At hearing, he termed the offer

“unorthodox,” but testified that he made it because he would “rather have the guns off the streets

than seek prosecution.” He explained that he believed that the defendant was the only person

who knew where the guns were, and that failing to locate them posed a public safety threat.

       At 11:37 a.m., Webster reassured the defendant: “I have no reason to lie to you. Like I

said, 23 years, that‟s all I have is my reputation.” Id. at 11:37:25. The defendant responded:

“That‟s fair enough. The rest of them [the guns] are up in the attic of that house.” Id. at

11:37:40. Webster left the room to begin making arrangements to search for the guns. He

reentered with Battle, turned to the defendant and stated: “This is what we agreed to, correct?”

                                                4
Id. at 11:42:10. He then told Battle, in the defendant‟s presence: “The guns, the remaining guns,

are in the attic, OK, but we‟re not going to charge him with that. For now, we‟re just going to

take the guns . . . and until he gets that paperwork squared away, the protection order . . . .” Id. at

11:42:15. Noting that officers had already been to the residence, seized rifles, and not found

handguns, Battle warned: “Don‟t throw out this [inaudible] deal, don‟t be holding back.” Id. at

11:43:05.

       For nearly 20 more minutes, Battle and Webster continued to press the defendant as to

the veracity of his report. The defendant continued to insist that he had left the guns in the attic,

offering to go look with the police and suggesting that, if they were not there, someone else must

have moved or taken them.

       When Battle questioned the defendant as to whether he had taken or handled the

handguns that morning, the defendant stated: “He [Webster] gave me a deal, I mean, you guys

are going to hang onto them[.]” Id. at 11:46:17. Battle responded: “I don‟t know if he [Webster]

told you . . . this place is recorded. This ain‟t television, guy, we‟re not going to sit here and pull

some BS and then all of a sudden afterwards [. . .], because we‟ve got to explain everything.” Id.

at 11:46:24. A short time later, Battle told the defendant: “You do realize that he [Webster] can‟t

tell you one thing and do another. I can‟t tell you one thing and do another. That throws the

whole case out and ruins my credibility.” Id. at 11:50:42.

       Before noon, Webster left the interview room for a few minutes. When he returned at

about noon, the following exchange ensued:

               Webster: Did you take the guns with you this morning?

               Defendant: No.

               Webster: Are you sure?



                                                  5
              Defendant: I‟m sure.

               Webster: Because everybody I‟ve talked to says they‟re not in the attic. . .
       . I think you‟re fucking lying to us, and that‟s not going to help you. You know
       damn well what you did this morning.

             Defendant: Yeah, I do, I did know exactly what I did, and this doesn‟t
       make any sense to me. If we can go, I can try and find them and see if somebody
       moved them, took them.

                                               ***

              Webster: I hope for your sake you‟re telling the truth. . . . I don‟t know
       you, you don‟t know me. I have absolutely no reason to lie to you.

              Defendant: You‟ve already given me a deal.

              Webster: I have. But we‟ve got to find the guns.

Id. at 12:00:50. At 12:06 p.m., Webster left to search the attic of the defendant‟s residence for

the handguns. Battle remained with the defendant, engaging in small talk with him for nearly an

hour as the two awaited word from Webster. Seconds after Webster left, Battle reiterated: “Now

you understand, I can‟t tell you I‟m going to do A and turn around and do B. I can‟t tell you

we‟re not going to charge you and turn around and charge you. We can‟t do that. . . . So it‟s to

your advantage to come clean on this.” Id. at 12:06:40.

       Webster found no guns in the attic of the defendant‟s residence. A family member

informed him that, earlier in the day, the defendant had left the residence with a black bag

containing handguns. At 12:48 p.m., Simons returned to the interview room and informed the

defendant that Webster wanted to know what had happened to the black duffel bag that the

defendant took with him that morning. The defendant said that he had taken only plastic bags

containing clothes, not a duffel bag. Simons left and spoke with Webster, who instructed him to

charge the defendant with being a prohibited person in possession of a firearm. Webster testified

that this instruction, in his view, was not inconsistent with his promise not to charge the

                                                6
defendant if he divulged the whereabouts of the guns: a deal was a deal, and, despite having been

provided ample opportunity to disclose the guns‟ location, the defendant had failed to do so.

        At 1:01 p.m. Simons returned and informed the defendant that he was going to jail. The

following exchange took place:

                 Simons: I‟m not sure who Sergeant Webster‟s been talking to or what‟s
        going on, but it sounded like whatever he‟s been talking to you about, as far as a
        good offer and everything else – it sounded too good to be true to me – but he said
        that it . . . hinged on getting all truth . . . . He just called me and says he‟s not
        convinced after what he‟s found out, I don‟t know exactly what.

                  Defendant: I thought he was going to let me go.

                  Simons: So we‟re going to take you over and we‟re going to book you in.
        ...

                  Defendant: So he‟s not giving me the deal now? I don‟t get it.

                  Simons: I‟m not entirely sure what he found out there, but he said that . . .

              Defendant: Oh man, that‟s not even my fault that they‟re…. Is that officer
        [Webster] around?

               Simons: He‟s still out there, he‟s still trying to find out exactly a little
        more about it, but he said for now, to take you over.

                                                  ***

               Defendant: So when he [Webster] was talking to the camera up there and
        said he wasn‟t going to rescind it and all that, that was just a lie? I don‟t
        understand.

                Battle: You‟re going to have to deal with him on that. I don‟t understand.
        I‟m just the messenger. We‟ll see what they find out.

Id. at 1:01:28.

        The defendant was placed in handcuffs, and Battle escorted him to the back seat of his

cruiser to transport him to Cumberland County Jail. During that trip, a cruiser camera recorded

the conversation between the defendant and Battle. That tape was introduced into evidence,



                                                    7
without objection, as Gov‟t Exh. 2 (“Cruiser DVD”). While the tape also recorded video, the

camera faced forward from the cruiser dashboard and, thus, the tape did not capture either Battle

or the defendant on video.

         Battle told the defendant, within seconds of entering the cruiser: “Alright, they can‟t find

the handguns, and that was the deal on the handguns.” Cruiser DVD at 13:06:40. The defendant

repeatedly asked Battle whether he could talk to Webster, go look for the guns, and/or speak to

his wife and find out if she put them someplace. Battle initially resisted, and then pulled his

cruiser over to the side of the road and contacted Webster via cell phone. The following

exchange ensued:

                 Battle to Webster: He is adamant, if I bring him there, he can produce
         those items. . . .

                 Battle to Defendant: They said you left the house with a duffle bag, you
         took a duffle bag with you. That‟s what his whole concern is about, is about that
         duffle bag full of guns. What did you do with that duffle bag full of guns?

                  [Approximately 20 seconds of silence.]

                  Battle to Defendant: Last chance.

                 Battle to Defendant While Listening to Webster: We can‟t find the guns,
         you lied to us, so . . . .

                  Defendant: We have a deal . . . if I can find them, we still have a deal?

                Battle to Defendant While Listening to Webster: They‟re going to get a
         search warrant for your storage bin, they‟re going get a search warrant for your
         mother‟s house . . . .

                  Defendant: If I produce them, do we still have the deal and everything?

                  Battle to Webster: If he produces them, does he still have the deal?

                  Battle to Defendant: It‟s up to you.3

3
  Battle testified that he did not recall whether he said, “It‟s up to you” to Webster or to the defendant, although he
believed he said it to Webster. After listening carefully to the tape, I resolve doubts in the defendant‟s favor. Battle
(continued on next page)

                                                           8
                  Defendant: Is that a yes?

                  Battle to Defendant: Do you know where they are?

                  Defendant: I‟m pretty sure I know . . . .

                  Battle to Defendant: Where are they? Where are they? Where are they?

                  Defendant: In a car at my work.

Id. at 13:11:11. Battle described Webster as having been “animated” during this conversation,

and speaking loudly into the phone, a characterization with which Webster did not disagree.

Webster‟s voice can be heard on the tape, although his words are inaudible.

         As it happened, Webster instructed Battle to tell the defendant not only that he would be

applying for search warrants but also that (i) the offer was off the table, (ii) he would find the

handguns on his own, and (iii) he would note in his report that the defendant was finally

cooperative, if the defendant chose then to disclose the handguns‟ true location.                          Webster

conveyed none of those things to the defendant prior to his confession.

         Following his confession, Battle obtained the defendant‟s oral consent to search the

vehicle, a BMW parked in the lot at the defendant‟s place of employment on Forest Avenue.

The defendant also gave Battle permission to retrieve his car key from his property bag, which

Battle had placed in the front seat of the cruiser. Battle and Webster met at an agreed-upon spot,

and Battle provided Webster the BMW key. As Webster approached Battle‟s cruiser, he told the

defendant: “You‟re going to be charged.” Id. at 13:17:10. The defendant pleaded with Webster

to give him a break, explaining that he lied because he was afraid that he was going to lose his

job. Webster held firm, stating: “You‟ve made your bed. I didn‟t. I had nothing to do with this.
_______________________
used the same louder, more distinct tone of voice in stating, “It‟s up to you,” that he had used in other statements
that clearly were directed to the defendant rather than to Webster. In any event, as Battle himself admitted on cross-
examination, the defendant could have understood that statement to be directed to him.


                                                          9
I gave you a great opportunity. You chose not to take it. . . . You looked right at me, and you

lied. So because of that, you‟ll be charged.” Id. at 13:19:56. Webster did agree to put in his

report that the defendant eventually had been cooperative, and he did.

         Battle took the defendant to the Cumberland County Jail, while Webster proceeded to the

lot on Forest Avenue. He opened the car trunk and retrieved a black bag, eventually found to

contain most of the missing handguns. He also seized a gun that the lot owner had retrieved

from a jacket belonging to the defendant at his place of employment, as well as court paperwork

found in the jacket.

                                                 II. Discussion

         The defendant seeks to suppress nearly all statements that he made to police on February

15, 2010, on the bases that (i) Webster violated his Miranda rights in failing to respect his

request to stop the questioning and obtain an attorney, (ii) his waiver of his right to remain silent

was neither voluntary, knowing, or intelligent because obtained by deceptive police promises,

and (iii) his statements were coerced and, hence, involuntary. See Motion To Suppress at 3-10.

During oral argument, defense counsel contended that these violations require suppression of all

statements made by his client following his unheeded assertion of his Miranda rights at 11:32:52

a.m. on February 15, 2010. Defense counsel also sought suppression of the guns seized from his

client‟s BMW as “fruit of the poisonous tree.”4

         The government bears the burden of proving both Miranda compliance, see, e.g., United

States v. Barone, 968 F.2d 1378, 1384 (1st Cir. 1992), and the voluntariness of a confession, see,

e.g., United States v. Jackson, 918 F.2d 236, 241 (1st Cir. 1990). For the reasons that follow, I

4
 “Under the „fruit of the poisonous tree‟ doctrine, all evidence derived from the exploitation of an illegal search or
seizure must be suppressed, unless the Government shows that there was a break in the chain of events sufficient to
refute the inference that the evidence was a product of the Fourth Amendment violation.” United States v. Rivas,
157 F.3d 364, 368 (5th Cir. 1998).


                                                         10
conclude that the government meets its burden with respect to each of the defendant‟s points.

Therefore, I recommend denial of his motion to suppress.

          A. Asserted Invocation of Rights To Cease Questioning, Obtain Counsel

       In Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477 (1981), the Supreme Court held that law

enforcement officers must immediately cease questioning of a suspect who clearly asserts his or

her right to have counsel present during interrogation.     See Edwards, 451 U.S. at 484-85.

However, the Court left open the question of how law enforcement should respond when a

suspect makes a reference to counsel that is ambiguous or otherwise insufficiently clear. That

issue was addressed in Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452 (1994), in which the Supreme Court

declined “to extend Edwards and require law enforcement officers to cease questioning

immediately upon the making of an ambiguous or equivocal reference to an attorney.” Davis,

512 U.S. at 459. The Court held that, “after a knowing and voluntary waiver of the Miranda

rights, law enforcement officers may continue questioning until and unless the suspect clearly

requests an attorney.” Id. at 461. The Court observed:

       Of course, when a suspect makes an ambiguous or equivocal statement it will
       often be good police practice for the interviewing officers to clarify whether or
       not he actually wants an attorney. That was the procedure followed by the NIS
       agents in this case. Clarifying questions help protect the rights of the suspect by
       ensuring that he gets an attorney if he wants one, and will minimize the chance of
       a confession being suppressed due to subsequent judicial second-guessing as to
       the meaning of the suspect‟s statement regarding counsel. But we decline to
       adopt a rule requiring officers to ask clarifying questions. If the suspect‟s
       statement is not an unambiguous or unequivocal request for counsel, the officers
       have no obligation to stop questioning him.

Id. at 461-62.

       With respect to the level of clarity required to invoke a suspect‟s right to counsel, the

Court explained:




                                               11
       To avoid difficulties of proof and to provide guidance to officers conducting
       interrogations, this is an objective inquiry. Invocation of the Miranda right to
       counsel requires, at a minimum, some statement that can reasonably be construed
       to be an expression of a desire for the assistance of an attorney. But if a suspect
       makes a reference to an attorney that is ambiguous or equivocal in that a
       reasonable officer in light of the circumstances would have understood only that
       the suspect might be invoking the right to counsel, our precedents do not require
       the cessation of questioning.

        . . . Although a suspect need not speak with the discrimination of an Oxford don,
       he must articulate his desire to have counsel present sufficiently clearly that a
       reasonable police officer in the circumstances would understand the statement to
       be a request for an attorney. If the statement fails to meet the requisite level of
       clarity, Edwards does not require that the officers stop questioning the suspect.

Id. at 458-59 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in original).

       In reaching this result, the Court considered the information-gathering function of law

enforcement. First, the Court recognized that “when the officers conducting the questioning

reasonably do not know whether or not the suspect wants a lawyer, a rule requiring the

immediate cessation of questioning would transform the Miranda safeguards into wholly

irrational obstacles to legitimate police investigative activity because it would needlessly prevent

the police from questioning a suspect in the absence of counsel even if the suspect did not wish

to have a lawyer present.” Id. at 460 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Second,

the Court considered that Edwards “provides a bright line that can be applied by officers in the

real world of investigation and interrogation without unduly hampering the gathering of

information” and that, if the Court “were to require questioning to cease if a suspect makes a

statement that might be a request for an attorney, this clarity and ease of application would be

lost.” Id. at 461 (emphasis in original). In weighing the interests at stake, the Court stated:

       We recognize that requiring a clear assertion of the right to counsel might
       disadvantage some suspects who – because of fear, intimidation, lack of linguistic
       skills, or a variety of other reasons – will not clearly articulate their right to
       counsel although they actually want to have a lawyer present. But the primary



                                                 12
        protection afforded suspects subject to custodial interrogation is the Miranda
        warnings themselves.

Id. at 460.

        In Berghuis v. Thompkins, 130 S. Ct. 2250 (2010), the Court extended these principles to

the invocation of the right to cease questioning, stating: “[T]here is no principled reason to adopt

different standards for determining when an accused has invoked the Miranda right to remain

silent and the Miranda right to counsel at issue in Davis.” Berghuis, 130 S. Ct. at 2260.

        During oral argument, counsel for the government contended that the defendant did not

sufficiently clearly invoke his right either to counsel or to cease interrogation and, hence, police

did not transgress his Miranda rights in continuing to question him. She argued that a defendant

bears some responsibility for making sure that his or her request is heard, that the defendant in

this case did nothing when Webster talked over him, that it should have been apparent that his

statement was inaudible, and that the audible portion of his request was ambiguous.             She

contended that, even had his entire statement been audible, his demeanor, attitude, and word

choice at the point when he made the statement, and throughout the interview, did not convey an

unambiguous desire to cease questioning or invoke his right to counsel.

        During oral argument, defense counsel underscored that a suspect need not “speak with

the discrimination of an Oxford don” to invoke the right to counsel or the right to remain silent,

Davis, 512 U.S. at 459; see also Berghuis, 130 S. Ct. at 2260. He argued that, in common

parlance, the use of the phrase “I guess” does not undermine a declarative sentence. For

example, he noted, a waiter hearing a patron state, “I guess I‟ll have the Brew House ale,” would

bring him or her that beverage, not question whether he or she meant to order it. He argued that,

post-Davis, the typical case in which ambiguity has been found concerns equivocal statements

such as, “Maybe I should get a lawyer,” in contrast to the declarative, “I guess I should get a

                                                13
lawyer.” He asserted that, rather than listening for the defendant‟s invocation of Miranda rights,

as he argued that officers must, Webster impermissibly badgered the defendant into further

discussion. He noted that in Kyger v. Carlton, 146 F.3d 374 (6th Cir. 1998), the United States

Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit not only held a suspect‟s statement that he would “just as

soon have an attorney” unambiguous, but also stated that, if the request were equivocal,

subsequent statements by police constituted “an inappropriate effort at pressuring Kyger to

answer, rather than an appropriate attempt to get Kyger to clarify his response.” Kyger, 146 F.3d

at 379. The court stated: “This would also render this questioning constitutionally infirm.” Id.

       I conclude that the defendant did not unambiguously invoke either his right to counsel or

his right to cease questioning. First, his use of the phrase, “I guess,” twice, spoken while

lowering his voice, conveyed uncertainty. Had Webster heard the entire statement, a “reasonable

officer in light of the circumstances would have understood only that the [defendant] might be

invoking the right to counsel” and the right to cease questioning. Davis, 512 U.S. at 459

(emphasis in original); Berghuis, 130 S. Ct. at 2260; see also, e.g., Sechrest v. Ignacio, 549 F.3d

789, 807 (9th Cir. 2008) (“We have . . . held that the statements, „I think I would like to talk to a

lawyer,‟ and „maybe [I] ought to see an attorney‟ were not clear and unambiguous requests for

counsel.”); United States v. Peters, 435 F.3d 746, 751 (7th Cir. 2006) (noting that “case law in

this area is strict” and that requests held ambiguous by courts include, “I might want to talk to an

attorney[,]” “I just don‟t think that I should say anything,” and “I need somebody that I can talk

to[.]”); United States v. Mees, No. 4:09CR00145 ERW, 2009 WL 1657420, at *9 (E.D. Mo. June

10, 2009) (statements, “Then I guess I‟m just gonna wait until I get a lawyer and I don‟t know

what else (inaudible)[,]” and “I guess I need to wait and talk to a lawyer[,]” did not constitute

unambiguous, unequivocal requests for an attorney).



                                                 14
       Second, because the defendant happened to be speaking particularly softly when making

the statement in question, and Webster spoke in a louder voice over him, the latter part of his

sentence was inaudible. It should have been apparent to the defendant that Webster had not

heard it and, thus, the defendant had not clearly conveyed it.

       Third, the portion of the statement that Webster did hear was, in itself, ambiguous: “I

guess this is where I have to stop . . . .” While the Supreme Court has stated that asking

clarifying questions is the better practice, Webster‟s failure to do so is immaterial: The Court has

expressly declined to require that such clarifying questions be asked. See, e.g., Davis, 512 U.S.

at 461-62; Berghuis, 130 S. Ct. at 2260. To the extent that Kyger holds that a failure to clarify an

ambiguous request for counsel transgresses Miranda, it does not square with Davis.

                                         B. Miranda Waiver

       As the First Circuit has noted:

       A defendant may make a valid waiver of his rights under Miranda if he does so
       voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently. The district court must begin with the
       presumption that the defendant did not waive his rights. The government bears
       the burden of proving a valid waiver by a preponderance of the evidence.

United States v. Downs-Moses, 329 F.3d 253, 267 (1st Cir. 2003) (citations omitted). A waiver

is considered “voluntary” if it was “the product of a free and deliberate choice rather than

intimidation, coercion and deception”; it is “knowing and intelligent” if “made with full

awareness of both the nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences of the decision

to abandon.” United States v. Rosario-Diaz, 202 F.3d 54, 69 (1st Cir. 2000) (citations and

internal quotation marks omitted). The question of whether a given waiver was voluntary,

knowing, and intelligent is examined with reference to “the totality of the circumstances and the

facts surrounding the particular case including the background experience and conduct of the

accused.” Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).

                                                15
         The defendant contends that his waiver of his right to remain silent was rendered

involuntary by the deceptive tactic of repeated promises that he would not be charged if he

confessed the location of the handguns. See Motion To Suppress at 6-8. He adds that the same

deception undermined his capacity to appreciate the nature of that right and the consequences of

his decision to abandon it. See id. at 8-9. Having been repeatedly assured that he would not be

subject to a gun possession charge if he disclosed the whereabouts of the guns, he had no

appreciation that forgoing his right to remain silent would lead to the negative consequences that

he now faces. See id.5

         As argued by counsel for the government, a careful review of the videotapes submitted

into evidence reveals that the defendant made strategic, voluntary, and knowing choices

concerning what he revealed to the police, and when. Webster at no point endeavored to deceive

the defendant, and the defendant was not in fact deceived, by his promises. While Battle, in the

moments before the crucial confession, did employ a deceptive tactic (wittingly or unwittingly),

the defendant was not thereby deceived into confessing. His waiver of his right to remain silent

was voluntary, knowing, and intelligent.6


5
  In his papers, the defendant argued, for purposes of the voluntariness prong of the Miranda waiver inquiry, that he
had been intimidated, coerced, and deceived into waiving his right to remain silent by the promise that he would not
be charged with a crime if he disclosed the guns‟ location. See Motion To Suppress at 7. During oral argument,
defense counsel focused, for purposes of the voluntariness prong, on the asserted deception, acknowledging that the
First Circuit observed in United States v. Byram, 145 F.3d 405 (1st Cir. 1998), that trickery is not automatically
coercion but that it can undermine the force of a Miranda warning. See Byram, 145 F.3d at 408 (“Certainly some
types of police trickery can entail coercion: consider a confession obtained because the police falsely threatened to
take a suspect‟s child away from her if she did not cooperate. But trickery is not automatically coercion. . . . Given
the narrowed definition of coercion in [Colorado v.] Connelly, 479 U.S. 157 (1986),] it would be very hard to treat
as coercion a false assurance to a suspect that he was not in danger of prosecution. (Of course, a false assurance
might undercut the gist of a warning, raising questions whether Miranda had been satisfied; but that is a different
problem that we need not address since no Miranda warnings at all were given here.”) (citations omitted) (emphasis
in original).
6
  The defendant does not argue that he did not initially make a valid Miranda waiver after being informed of his
rights. The Interview Room DVD discloses that he did. Webster read each right aloud, pausing to ask if the
defendant understood it, and the defendant stated that he did. Nothing in the videotape indicates that the defendant
lacked the capacity to comprehend his rights. He appears intelligent, articulate, calm, and even at times relaxed.
Further, at oral argument, defense counsel acknowledged that his client had had some involvement with the police
(continued on next page)

                                                         16
         The videotapes reveal that Webster repeatedly promised the defendant that he would not

be subjected to a gun charge if he disclosed the guns‟ location. Nonetheless, Webster made clear

from the outset that he sought “honesty” from the defendant. Just prior to Webster‟s departure to

search for the guns that the defendant had said would be in the attic, Battle warned: “Don‟t throw

out this [inaudible] deal, don‟t be holding back.” Interview Room DVD at 11:43:05. Webster

himself stated, just prior to leaving: “I think you‟re fucking lying to us, and that‟s not going to

help you. . . . I hope for your sake you‟re telling the truth.” Id. at 12:00:50. When the defendant

then rejoined, “You‟ve already given me a deal[,]” Webster stated: “I have. But we‟ve got to

find the guns.” Id. at 12:02:20. The defendant, who had removed the guns from his residence

some hours earlier and placed them in the trunk of his BMW at work, knew as Webster departed

the interview room that the “deal‟s” precondition was not about to be satisfied.

         Rather than being induced by Webster‟s and Battle‟s promises to forgo his right to

remain silent and to disclose the location of the handguns, the defendant chose to lie about their

whereabouts in an apparent attempt to advantage himself, in circumstances in which the risk of

scuttling the offered “deal” by his mendacity should have been apparent. 7 Simons made clear in

placing the defendant under arrest, and the defendant understood, that Webster had, or at least

likely had, rescinded the “deal” on confirming his suspicions that the defendant had lied. See id.

at 1:01:28 (statement to defendant by Simons: “as far as a good offer and everything else – it

sounded too good to be true to me – but he [Webster] said that it . . . hinged on getting all truth . .

_______________________
prior to his arrest on February 15, 2010. After reading the defendant his rights, Webster omitted to ask whether he
agreed to waive them and speak to him. However, “a waiver of Miranda rights may be implied through the
defendant‟s silence, coupled with an understanding of his rights and a course of conduct indicating waiver.”
Berghuis, 130 S. Ct. at 2261 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The defendant readily began answering
questions following the reading of his rights.
7
  The defendant later told Webster that he lied out of fear that he would lose his job if he led police to his workplace,
where the guns were stored. He evidently had hoped to cover up his lie by blaming someone else for the removal of
the guns from the attic. But the police did not buy that explanation.


                                                          17
. . He just called me and says he‟s not convinced after what he‟s found out, I don‟t know exactly

what.”), 1:03:32 (defendant‟s statement: “So when he [Webster] was talking to the camera up

there and said he wasn‟t going to rescind it and all that, that was just a lie? I don‟t understand.”).

         Later, when Battle was on his cell phone with Webster, and the defendant was given a

“last chance” to come clean, the defendant twice asked whether, if he produced the guns, he and

Webster still had a deal. Battle, for whatever reasons, did not pass along Webster‟s statement

that the deal was off, instead stating: “It‟s up to you.”                   Cruiser DVD at 13:13:02.              That

ambiguous statement, standing alone, could have left the false impression that the deal was still

on. Yet, the defendant pressed: “Is that a yes?” Id. at 13:13:04. Battle never assured him that it

was, offering no response at all, before beginning to press him as to the guns‟ whereabouts. In

the absence of the reassurance that he was seeking, the defendant decided to take his chances that

Webster would in fact make good on the offer when the guns‟ location was finally disclosed.

That did not work out as he had hoped. Yet, at all times, he knowingly, intelligently, and

voluntarily chose to make disclosures at such a time, and in such a fashion, as he deemed

advantageous to himself.8




8
  It is not clear that the defendant even sets forth a valid theory of Miranda waiver violation. The First Circuit has
expressed doubt that, in circumstances in which a suspect has made a valid initial waiver of Miranda rights, and has
not clearly and unequivocally invoked one or more of those rights during questioning, a Miranda violation occurs
when police allegedly mislead or trick the suspect during questioning. See United States v. Bezanson-Perkins, 390
F.3d 34, 41 (1st Cir. 2004) (“There is an obvious tension in the argument [made by Bezanson-Perkins that, after a
valid Miranda waiver, during the interrogation the police misled or tricked him]: defendant voluntarily and validly
waived the presence of counsel and right to remain silent, thus subjecting himself to the risk of his self-incriminating
responses to police misstatements not corrected by counsel; but he nonetheless seeks to immunize himself from that
risk afterward by saying that because the police made misstatements, he can invalidate the waiver. It is doubtful,
under Moran [v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412 (1986)], that any such rule exists.”). However, because I find that the
defendant‟s waiver of his right to remain silent was not the product of deception, I need not consider whether
deceptive tactics during an interrogation have any bearing on the validity of a suspect‟s earlier valid waiver of
Miranda rights and, if so, in what circumstances.


                                                          18
                                C. Voluntariness of Statements

       The defendant raises a final basis for suppression of evidence: that his statements were

the product of coercive questioning and, hence, involuntary. See Motion To Suppress at 9.

       Involuntary confessions violate the due-process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth

amendments. See, e.g., United States v. Genao, 281 F.3d 305, 310 (1st Cir. 2002). In the face of

a defendant‟s claim that his confession was extracted involuntarily, the government bears the

burden of showing, based on the totality of the circumstances, that investigating agents neither

“broke” nor overbore his will. Chambers v. Florida, 309 U.S. 227, 239-40 (1940). As this

language suggests, “coercive police activity is a necessary predicate to the finding that a

confession is not „voluntary[.]‟” Connelly, 479 U.S. at 167. See also, e.g., Rice v. Cooper, 148

F.3d 747, 750 (7th Cir. 1998) (“A confession or other admission is not deemed coerced or

involuntary merely because it would not have been made had the defendant not been mentally

defective or deranged. The relevant constitutional principles are aimed not at protecting people

from themselves but at curbing abusive practices by public officers.”) (citation omitted).

       As defense counsel acknowledged during oral argument, the First Circuit has expressly

stated that “it would be very hard to treat as coercion a false assurance to a suspect that he was

not in danger of prosecution.” Byram, 145 F.3d at 408 (emphasis in original); see also, e.g.,

United States v. Boskic, 545 F.3d 69, 80 (1st Cir. 2008) (“Although the fact that the agents

allowed [the suspect] to believe that he was not under investigation may have made him less

guarded and self-protective, that deception alone did not make his statements involuntary.”);

Bezanson-Perkins, 390 F.3d at 41 (“The Supreme Court has rejected challenges to confessions

on the basis that they were procured by deceits.”).




                                                19
       Because, as discussed above, the government has demonstrated that the defendant‟s

confession was not procured by deceit but rather was voluntarily made, and, in any event, the

above-quoted First Circuit precedent suggests that challenges to confessions based on the type of

deceit here alleged fail as a matter of law, suppression is not warranted on this basis.

                                          III. Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, I recommend that the Motion To Suppress be DENIED.



                                             NOTICE


        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within fourteen (14)
days after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for
oral argument before the district judge shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the filing
of the objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review
by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


       Dated this 14th day of September, 2010.

                                                      /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                      John H. Rich III
                                                      United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 20
