UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR 'I`HE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
vs. CR No. 07-147-ML
TIMOTHY FALCON d
MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

Timothy Falcon has filed a motion to vacate, set aside or correct sentence pursuant to 28
U.S.C. § 2255 . He has also filed a motion to amend his motion to vacate, and an accompanying
motion for an evidentiary hearing. For the reasons that follow, all of these motions are DENIED.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND TRAVEL

On September 25, 2007, Falcon was arrested for possessing cocaine with the intent to
distribute. Falcon was initially represented by Federal Defender Kevin Fitzgerald; however, in
November 2007, prior to his indictrnent, Falcon retained Attomey Damon D’Ambrosio, who
represented him for all remaining proceedings in this Court. In December 2007, a federal grand
jury returned an Indictrnent against Falcon. On February 13, 2008, the grand jury returned a four-
count Superseding lndictment against Falcon, charging him with two counts of possession with
intent to distribute cocaine, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), (b)(l)(B) and (b)(l)(C) and 18
U.S.C. § 2 (Counts I and Il); possession of a firearm after having been convicted of a felony, in
violation of 21 U.S.C. §922(g)(1) (Count I]I); and possessing a firearm in furtherance of a drug
trafficking crime, in Violation of 21 U.S.C. §922(0) (Count IV).

Falcon signed a plea agreement in which he agreed to plead guilty to all counts. In the plea
agreement Falcon stipulated to possessing with intent to distribute at least 500 grams of cocaine and

to selling approximately 100 grams of cocaine per week for the past year. (Plea Agreement, 1111 4a.,

4.b.) He also agreed to forfeit his interest in two guns and $17,000 in U.S. currency that were seized
at the time of his arrest. (M. 1[‘[[ l.e., l.f.) In return, the Government agreed to recommend a three-
point reduction in Falcon’s offense level for acceptance of responsibility; to recommend a sentence
at the low end of the applicable guideline range found by the Court; and to refrain from filing an
information pursuant to 21 U.S.C. §851. (Ll_. 111[ 2.a., 2.c., 2.e.) ln addition, Falcon waived his right
to file a direct appeal. (ld. 1[12).

At the change of plea hearing conducted on March 7, 2008, this Court extensively reviewed
with F alcon the terms of his plea agreement (§e§ Transcript of Change of Plea Hearing conducted
on March 7 , 2008 [“Plea Tr.”] at 6-34.) During the plea colloquy, this Court asked Falcon if he had
reviewed the plea agreement with his counsel, to which he responded yes. (IQ. at 7.) The Court then
reviewed with Falcon each of the substantive terms in the agreementl This Court also specifically
reviewed With Falcon the appeal waiver provision (Plea Agreement, 1112), and Falcon said he
understood (Plea Tr. at 29-30.) Falcon further stated that he was satisfied with his representation
and that he did not have any questions about his plea agreement (l_d. at 6, 30.) He denied that
anyone had made any promises or assurances to him as to what sentence he would receive. (E. at
30.)

The Government summarized the evidence it would present if the matter were to go to trial:

on September 6, 2007 Pawtucket police were surveilling an apartment located at 112 Denver Street

 

l ln the course of Falcon’s plea colloquy, this Court specifically reviewed inter alia: the range

of penalties for each of the offenses to which he was pleading guilty, including the mandatory minimum
sentence for the Count I offense and the consecutive sentence for the Count IV offense (Plea Tr. at 19-
25); the guideline provisions applicable to his offenses (Q. at 17-20); and Falcon’s stipulations that he
possessed at least 500 grams of cocaine with intent to distribute and that he had sold at least 100 grams of
cocaine per week for the past year (i£l. at 24-25). This Court also specifically informed Falcon that this
Court made the final decision as to his sentence and that it was not bound by the recommendations in the
plea agreement or otherwise. (_Id. at 26-29.) Falcon indicated he understood these matters

_2_

incident to executing state court search warrants for that apartment and an apartment at 684-686
Prospect Street in Pawtucket Falcon was arrested when he attempted to leave the Denver Street
apartment The Police recovered 7 grams of cocaine and the .22 caliber pistol from Falcon’s vehicle.
During a search of the Denver Street apartment, police discovered 58 grams of cocaine, a suspected
drug ledger, the .45 caliber Sig-Sauer pistol and $17,000 cash in a safe. (_I<_l. at 37-38.) At the
Prospect Street apartment, officers found approximately 579 grams of cocaine in four bags in a
kitchen drawer; Falcon’s fingerprints were found on two of the bags. (M. at 38.) At the police
station, after being advised of his constitutional rights, Falcon admitted that he had been selling
approximately 100 grams of cocaine per week for the past year and that he purchased both firearms
for protection in connection with his drug business. (ld. at 38-39.) At the conclusion of this
reeitation, Falcon admitted that all of the foregoing facts were true, and he pled guilty to all four
counts of the Superseding Indictment. (Ll. at 40-41.)

The Presentence Report (PSR) calculated a guideline range of 97 - 121 months for Counts
I-Ill, based on an offense level of 29 and a criminal history category II, plus 60 months consecutive
as to Count IV. (PSR 11 59.) At his sentencing hearing on June 20, 2008, Falcon did not raise any
specific objections to the PSR, although his counsel noted that the guideline range was higher than
Falcon had anticipated2 Falcon was sentenced to 97 months imprisonment on Counts I, II and IH
of the Superseding Indictment, to be served concurrently with each other, and to 60 months

imprisonment, to be served consecutively, on Count IV. Falcon did not appeal, and his conviction

 

2 At his sentencing hearing, Falcon attempted to state that he had been promised a lower

sentence by his counsel in connection with signing his plea agreement and asked to withdraw his plea,
but this Court denied that request, in view of the extensive colloquy conducted at his change of plea
hearing. Upon imposing sentence, this Court reminded Falcon that in view of the appeal waiver
provision in his plea agreement and the fact that his sentencing Was within the guideline range, he had no
right to appeal

_3_

became final on or about June 30, 2008.

Thereafcer, Falcon filed the instant motion to vacate (Doc. #37) with this Court. In his
motion Falcon asserts two claims of ineffective assistance: (1) that he was misled by his counsel as
to his potential sentence if he signed the plea agreement and pled guilty; and (2) that his subsequent
counsel failed to file a direct appeal despite Falcon’s request that he do so. The Government has
filed a response to the motion to vacate (Doc. #43), to which Falcon replied (Traverse, Doc. #45).

F alcon subsequently filed a motion for leave to amend his § 2255 motion (Doc. #46), seeking
to add claims of : police misconduct, tampering with evidence, obstruction of j ustice, and ineffective
assistance of counsel based on counsel’s failure to properly investigate the Govemment’s evidence
and to raise certain issues relating to that evidence. The Government has opposed this motion (E
Govemment’s Response to Petitioner’s Motion for Leave to Amend 28 U.S.C. §2255 Pleading (Doc.
#51) [“Govt Supp. Resp.”]). Falcon also filed a motion for evidentiary hearing (#47). This matter
is ready for decision.3

DISCUSSION

A defendant who claims that he was deprived of his Sixth Amendment right to effective

assistance of counsel must demonstrate:

(1) That his counsel’s performance fell below an objective standard of
reasonableness; and

 

3 Although Falcon requests an evidentiary hearing on his claims, no hearing is required in

connection with any issues raised by his motion to vacate, because, as discussed M, the files and
records of this case conclusively establish that the claims in the motion to vacate are without merit. w
David v. United States, 134 F.3d 470, 477 (lst Cir. 1998) (district court properly may forego any hearing
“when (1) the motion is inadequate on its face, or (2) the movant's allegations, even if true, do not entitle
him to relief, or (3) the movant's allegations need not be accepted as true because they state conclusions
instead of facts, contradict the record, or are inherently incredible.") (internal quotations omitted). §§
all Panzardi-Alvarez v. United States, 879 F.2d 975, 985 n.8 (lst Cir. 1989) (no hearing is required
where district judge is familiar with underlying criminal case). E alj discussion i_nf`r_a at footnote 16.
_4_

(2) [A] reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the
result of the proceeding would have been different

Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687-88, 694 (1984). § United States v. Manon, 608 F.3d
126 (lst Cir. 2010) (same).

G¢‘

To satisfy the deficient-performance prong, the defendant must identify the acts or omissions
of counsel that are alleged not to have been the result of reasonable professional judgment,’ and the
court then determines whether, in the particular context, the identified conduct or inaction was ‘outside
the wide range of professionally competent assistance.”’ United States v. Manon, 608 F.3d 126, 131
(lst Cir. 2010) (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690). Counsel’s performance is accorded deferential
review and should not be assessed based on hindsight Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690-92. _S_ge_ L_enLL
United States, 987 F.2d 48, 51 (lst Cir. 1993) (same). To satisfy the prejudice requirement, a
defendant must show a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s errors, the defendant would not
have pled guilty and would have insisted on going to trial. Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 59 (1985);
§§ also United States v. Colon-Torres, 382 F.3d 76, 86 (lst Cir. 2004) (same).
A. lneffective Assistance - Plea A,Q;reement

Falcon first claims that his initial counsel, Attomey Fitzgerald, promised him that he would
receive no more than a ten-year sentence and that as a result, he was misled into signing the plea
agreement and pleading guilty. Falcon argues that this promise, which never materialized, constitutes
ineffective assistance of counsel. (Pet. Mem. at 3, 6.)

This claim fails for several reasons. First, even assuming that Falcon’s assertions that Attomey

Fitzgerald made such a promise are true,4 he cannot show prejudice, i.e., that he would have proceeded

 

4 The Government reports that both Attomey Fitzgerald and Attomey D’Ambrosio have

declined to speak to Government counsel regarding Falcon’s allegations absent Falcon’s waiver of the
attorney-client privilege in connection with their respective representations Thus, this Court takes
Falcon’s allegations as true, although this does not change the result on his claim.

_5_

to trial had counsel not made those statements The record shows that Attorney Fitzgerald withdrew
and that Falcon retained Attomey D’Ambrosio as his counsel on November 21, 2007 -- prior to
Falcon’s initial indictment lt was Attomey D’Ambrosio who represented F alcon at the time he signed
his plea agreement Falcon further claims that Attomey D’Ambrosio likewise misled him to believe
he would receive a lesser sentence However, Falcon does not specifically say what Attomey
D’Arnbrosio told him on this point during his discussions5

More si gnificantly, when asked by the Court at the change of plea hearing whether anyone had
made any promises to him as to what sentence he might receive, Falcon responded, “No.”6 This
statement, made in open court under oath, directly undercuts his present claim. E United States v.
M, 731 F.2d 75, 80 (lst Cir. 1984) (“[T]he presumption of truthfulness of [defendant's] Rule 11
statements will not be overcome unless the allegations in the § 2255 motion include credible, valid
reasons why a departure from those earlier contradictory statements is now justified.”) ; s_e§ als_o Lit_ed
States v. Pulido, 566 F.3d 52, 5 9-60 (1 st Cir. 2009) (“[W]e have typically disregarded representations

at a plea colloquy ‘only when the allegations were highly specific and usually accompanied by some

 

5 The pertinent averments in Falcon’s affidavit accompanying his motion to vacate -- that he
was misled into signing the plea agreement (Falcon Aff. 1[ 4), that counsel failed to fully explain what
exposure Falcon would receive and his sentence was longer than promised (116); and that counsel induced
and coerced him to plead guilty (1]7) -- are likewise conclusory and belied by the record.

6 After this Court reviewed in detail the provisions of Falcon’s plea agreement the following

exchange oceurred:

Do you have any questions about the plea agreement?

No, your Honor.

No ?

No.

Has anybody made any promises or assurances to you as to What sentence you’re going
to get in this ease?

No. No.

Has anyone attempted in any way to force you to plead guilty in this case?

No.

P@.> QP>'Q?.>@

(Plea Tr. at 30.)

independent corroboration.”’) (quoting M, 731 F.2d at 80) (emphasis in original).

Of equal significance is the fact that this Court specifically advised Falcon that his counsel
could not guarantee any sentence and that the final decision regarding his sentence would be made by
this Court alone, all of which Falcon said he understood (Plea Tr. at 23, 27-28.)7 The Court further
advised him that the Count IV sentence would run consecutively to the sentences on the other counts
and that Falcon faced a maximum exposure of up to life imprisonment for his offenses; Falcon again
said he understood (IQ. at 15-16, 27-28.) This likewise vitiates any contention by Falcon that he
reasonably relied on his counsel’s alleged promises concerning sentence.

Finally, this Court notes that as part of the plea agreement, the Government agreed not to file
an information pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 85 1 concerning Falcon’s prior convictions Had F alcon elected

to go to trial, the Government would likely have filed such an inforrnation, thereby doubling the

 

7 The colloquy exchanges on this point are as follows:

THE COURT: Now, paragraph 3 says, at the top of page 6, that you understand that the guidelines are not binding
on the Court They're advisory. What that means is that I still have to conduct a guidelines analysis and come up with
a guideline range for you. Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: However, if I think that range is too low, I can go above it. If I think it‘s too high, I can go below it
Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
(Plea Tr. at 23.)

THE COURT: Okay. Now, would you skip ahead to paragraph 11. It's at the bottom of page 10. What that
paragraph says is some of the things we‘ve already talked about First, it says that you understand that I alone make
all of the sentencing decisions, including working up the guidelines and deciding what the ultimate sentence is going
to be in this ease. Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: It also says that I do not have to follow the recommendation that the Government has agreed to
make, I don't have to follow whatever your lawyer asks for. Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: Again, absolutely no guarantee here of what sentence you’re going to get Do you
understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

(Plea Tr. at 28-29.)

mandatory minimum sentence on Count I to 10 years and increasing the maximum sentences on Count
I to life imprisonment and on Count II to 30 years imprisonment (w Plea Agreement 112.e.) Thus,
it is unlikely that Falcon would have proceeded to trial even had he known that his counsel could not
have guaranteed his sentence.
In view of these considerations, Falcon’s first ineffective assistance claim fails.
C. Ineffective Assistance - Failure to ADDeal

In his second claim, Falcon alleges that Attomey D’Ambrosio was ineffective in failing to
file a direct appeal despite Falcon’s request that he do so.8 ln his affidavit filed with his motion to
vacate, Falcon asserts “that he did not knowingly and willingly waive his right to appeal and that he
specifically instructed his counsel D’Ambrosio to file an appeal.” (Falcon Aff. 11 5 .) Falcon makes
this assertion despite the express appeal waiver provision in his plea agreement and this Court’s
discussion of that provision with Falcon at the change of plea hearing.

In Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. 470 (2000), the Supreme Court initially observed that an
attorney's failure to file an appeal upon being instructed to do so by his client constitutes
professionally deficient performance fit at 477. ln those circumstances counsel's failure to file an
appeal “cannot be considered a strategic decision; filing a notice of appeal is a purely ministerial
task, and the failure to file reflects inattention to the defendant's wishes.” I_d. Turning to the issue

before it, the Court held that when a defendant has not expressly indicated his wishes, “counsel has

 

8 Falcon also claims that Attorney D’Ambrosio was ineffective in failing to exclude the appeal
waiver provision from the plea agreement (Motion to Vacate, Ground One.) Falcon fails to explain,
however, how counsel could have excluded that provision, given the likelihood that the Government
would have insisted that it be included in any plea agreement This Court finds no deficient performance
on the part of defense counsel in this respect, given the benefits to Falcon of having a plea agreement --
which included the Government’s waiver of the filing of a § 851 information -- and the lack of any viable
grounds for appeal. §r;e Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689 (counsel’s performance must be evaluated “from
counsel’s perspective at the time”). For the same reason, Falcon was not prejudiced by the inclusion of
the appeal waiver provision E. at 692.

_8_

a constitutionally imposed duty to consult With the defendant about an appeal when there is reason
to think either (1) that a rational defendant would want to appeal (for example, because there are
non-frivolous grounds for appeal), or (2) that this particular defendant reasonably demonstrated to
counsel that he was interested in appealing.” Ll. at 480. The Court held that a presumption of
prejudice applies in the context of a failure-to-appeal claim because an attomey's deficient
performance deprives a defendant of his or her opportunity for an appellate proceeding IQ. at 483.

Because there was no appeal Waiver provision in Flores-Ortega, that decision did not address
whether its holding would control where the defendant has waived his right to appeal. E gm
States v. Mabry_, 536 F,3d 231, 240 (3d Cir. 2008) (noting this fact). Although the First Circuit has
not addressed this issue, a number of other circuits have done so. Several circuits have concluded
that counsel must file an appeal when requested, even where the defendant has entered into a plea
agreement Waiving some or all of his appeal rights. § United States v. Poindexter, 492 F.3d 263,

273 (4th Cir. 2007); United States v. Tap_p, 491 F.3d 263, 266 (5th Cir. 2007); Watson v. United

 

States, 493 F.3d 960, 964 (8th Cir. 2007); Campusano v. United States, 442 F.3d 770, 777 (2d Cir.
2006); United States v. Sandoval-Lopez, 409 F.3d 1193, 1197 (9th Cir.2005); United States v.
M, 402 F.3d 1262, 1266-67 (10th Cir. 2005); Gomez-Diaz v. United States, 433 F.3d 788, 790
(1 lth Cir. 2005). On the other hand, at least two circuits have found that an appeal waiver provision
may preclude an ineffective assistance claim based on counsel's failure to appeal. See Mabgg, 536
F.3d at 239-244; Nunez v. United States, 546 F.3d 450 (7th Cir. 2008).

In M, the defendant pled guilty to drug and firearm charges and signed aplea agreement
in which he waived his right to file both a direct appeal and a collateral challenge to his sentence.
536 F.3d at 233. During the plea colloquy the district court confirmed that Mabry understood the

terms of the plea agreement and that the court was not bound by the calculation of the guidelines,

-9_

and verified that no promises or threats were made to induce him to plead. Ll. at 233-34. Mabry did
not appeal but instead filed a §2255 motion to vacate in which he claimed that his counsel was
ineffective in failing to file an appeal despite his request that he do so. E. at 234. Mabry described
four grounds that he would have raised on appeal, all of which challenged the calculation of his
sentence. In view of the waiver, the district court denied the §2255 motion without an evidentiary
hearing M. at 235.

The Third Circuit noted that the circuit courts which found that counsel was ineffective in
failing to file a requested appeal, notwithstanding the existence of a valid appeal waiver provision,
had examined the defendant’s rights under Flores-Ortega without first reviewing the enforceability
of the waiver provision itself. E. at 240 (“lnstead of scrutinizing the waiver, these courts have
focused on the importance of appeal rights as set forth in Flores-Ortega -- a non-waiver case -- and
in reliance thereon permitted appeals explicitly barred by the waiver.”) Thus, these other courts
“have applied Flores-Ortega to a situation in which it simply does not ‘fit.”’ lit at 241 .9 The M
court proceeded to examine the appeal waiver, found it to be valid and enforceable and further found
that enforcing it would not work any miscarriage of justice. E. at 242-43 (citing United States v.
Mar, 257 F.3d 14, 24 (1 st Cir. 2001)). The court affirmed the denial of habeas relief. fit at 243 -44.

Similarly, in Nunez v. United States, the Seventh Circuit denied § 2255 relief on a similar

ineffective assistance claim based on counsel’s failure to file an appeal, where the defendant’s plea

 

9 The Mabg court further elaborated:

The analysis employed in evaluating an ineffectiveness of counsel claim does not apply
When there is an appellate waiver. While a defendant may be entitled to habeas relief if
his attorney ineffectively fails to file a requested appeal because it is presumed to be
prejudicial under Flores-Ortega, if that same defendant has effectively waived his right to
habeas, he cannot even bring such a claim unless the waiver fails to pass muster under an
entirely different test: one that examines its knowing and voluntary nature and asks
whether its enforcement would work a miscarriage of justice.

536 F.3d at 241.
_1()_

agreement included a waiver of his appeal and collateral review rights The Nunez court noted that
unlike the situation in Flores-Ortega, “[f]iling an appeal is not ‘ministerial’ when the defendant has
waived that entitlement.” 546 F.3d at 454. The court further noted that “instead of being obliged to
follow his client’s latest wishes, however unreasonable they may be, a lawyer has a duty to the
judiciary to avoid frivolous litigation - and an appeal in the teeth of a valid waiver is f`rivolous.” Ll.
at 455. Moreover, “a lawyer also has a duty to his client to avoid taking steps that will cost the client
the benefit of the plea bargain.” lLl. Based on these considerations, the court denied habeas relief.10
Other Courts have likewise denied relief in similar, if not identical, circumstances § United States
v. Arevalo, 2010 WL 5391459 *2 (E.D. Ky. Dec. 22, 2010) and cases cited therein (denying §2255
relief where defendant pled guilty and signed a plea agreement waiving the right to both direct appeal
and collateral review).

This Court finds the approach of M and IM to be instructive and will first review the
appeal waiver provision signed by Falcon under the circumstances here and then examine whether
counsel’s failure to file an appeal as requested constitutes ineffective assistance.

It is well established in this Circuit that an appeal waiver provision will be enforced if: (1)
the provision is clearly set forth in the plea agreement; (2) the district court questions the defendant
“specifically about [his] understanding of the waiver provision and adequately inform[s] [him] of
its ramifications ;” and (3) no miscarriage of j ustice will otherwise result United States v. Chandler,

534 F.3d 45, 49 (1 st Cir. 2008) (citing Teeter, 257 F.3d at 24). Here, the first two factors are readily

 

10 The Nunez case had been remanded from the U.S. Supreme Court based on the Solicitor
General’s concession that it had misread the scope of the waiver provision. § Nunez v. United States,
- U.S. ~, 128 S.Ct. 2990 (2008). This procedural posture has no effect on this Court’s analysis here.

_11_

satisfied: the appeal waiver provision (11 12) in Falcon’s plea agreement is clear and unambiguousll
and this Court explained the appeal waiver provision to Falcon at his plea colloquy.12 This Court
further concludes, under the facts and circumstances here, that enforcing this provision will not work
any miscarriage of justice. _Sg M_a_bgg, 536 F.3d at 243 (reviewing underlying facts to determine
miscarriage of justice factor).

First, it is questionable whether Attomey D’Ambrosio’s failure to file an appeal on behalf
of Falcon was deficient under the circumstances here: Falcon knowingly and voluntarily waived his

right to appeal his sentence after having been fully advised by this Court that his sentence would be

 

ll Paragraph 12 of the Plea Agreement provides:

Defendant understands that Defendant may have the right to file a direct appeal from the sentence
imposed by the Court. Defendant hereby waives Defendant's right to file a direct appeal, if the
sentence imposed by the Court is within the guideline range determined by the Court or lower. This
agreement does not affect the rights or obligations of the United States as set forth in 18 U.S.C.

§3742(b), and the government retains its right to appeal any of the Court's sentencing determinations

12 The plea colloquy included the following exchange concerning the appeal waiver provision:

THE COURT: Paragraph 12 on the next page says that you understand that you may have a right to take an appeal
from any sentence I impose. Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: However, under the terms of this plea agreement, you are giving up that right if the sentence I impose
is within your guideline range or lower. So as we’ve already discussed, I make a determination of what your
guideline range is. You may not agree with that guideline range. You may think it’s too high. But if I sentence you
in that guideline range, you have no right to take an appeal Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: On the other hand, if the Government thinks I’ve been too lenient, they have a right to take an
appeal. They can go to the Court of Appeals, tell them I made a mistake, ask to have the sentence vacated, have the
case sent back here, and you could receive a harsher penalty. So you understand you’re giving up your right to take
an appeal, but the Government is not giving up its right to take an appeal. Do you understand that?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: Now Mr. Falcon, are those the terms of the plea agreement as you understood it at the time that you
signed it?

THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

THE COURT: Do you have any questions about the plea agreement?

THE DEFENDANT: No.

THE COURT: No?

THE DEFENDANT: No.

(Plea Tr. at 29-30.) E alj n. 6, supra (setting forth colloquy excerpt in which Falcon confirms that no
promises Were made to him in connection with his plea.)
_ 12_

determined solely by this Court and that this Court was not bound by any recommendations made
by either counsel for the Government or his own counsel. (E Plea Tr. at 28.)13 ln these
circumstances the filing of a notice of appeal was not a mere “ministerial task” without
consequences Rather, such an action would have relieved the Government from its obligations
under the plea agreement § M, 546 F.3d at 455 (noting that counsel has a duty to avoid taking
steps that will cost his client the benefit of a plea bargain). For example, if he appealed, Falcon ran
the risk that the Government would file a §851 information concerning his previous offenses, thereby
increasing his potential sentence. Moreover, the grounds that Falcon wished to raise -- that he had
been misled by counsel as to his potential sentence -- were contradicted by his admissions and
statements under oath in open court at the plea colloquy and thus were not likely to succeed (_S@
Plea Tr. at 30.) Finally, at his sentencing, this Court reminded Falcon that in view of his appeal
waiver, because his sentence was within the applicable guideline range, he did not have a right to
appeal. Viewed in this context, AttorneyD’Ambrosio’s failure to file an appeal cannot be considered
to fall “outside a wide range of professionally competent assistance” that Falcon could expect to
receive. § Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690; M, 536 F.3d at 242, n. 14.

This Court further notes that F alcon does not claim that the guidelines were improperly
calculated, and thus his appeal waiver provision fully applies to preclude any direct appeal so long
as his sentence was within the guideline range determined by this Court, which it was Nor does

Falcon make any claim of innocence or other unfaimess. S_e§ United States v. Gil-Ouezada, 445 F.3d

 

13 In his supporting affidavit Falcon avers as that “he did not knowingly or willingly waive his
right to a first appeal from the judgment entered by [this Court], and that he specifically instructed
counsel D’Ambrosio to file an appeal.” (Falcon Aff. 1[5.) The first assertion is belied by Falcon’s
admissions at his plea colloquy that he was voluntarily entering into the plea agreement (S_ee Plea Tr. at
30.) The second assertion, even if taken as true, does not compel relief for the reasons stated herein.

_13_

33, 37 (lst Cir. 2006) (miscarriage of justice standard “requires strong showing of innocence,
unfairness, or the like”).14

ln short, Falcon does not allege any facts suggesting that it would be a miscarriage of justice
to enforce the appeal waiver provision here. Moreover, the presumption of prejudice espoused in
Flores-Ortega, 484 U.S. at 480, does not apply to Falcon’s ineffective assistance claim in this case,
given the full and complete colloquy conducted by this Court and the appeal waiver provision signed
by Falcon. To hold otherwise would ignore Falcon’s initial counseled decision to Waive his appeal
rights and result in “a constitutional rule that would yield an exercise in futility.” M, 546 F.3d
at 45 6.15

Accordingly, this Court finds that Falcon’s ineffective assistance claim based on his

counsel’s failure to file a direct appeal on his behalf must fail in the circumstances of this case.16

 

14 This Court acknowledges that under First Circuit law an appeal waiver may not be enforced if
plea negotiations were “tainted by ineffective assistance of counsel,” so as to work a miscarriage of
justice. § Teeter, 257 F.3d at 25 n. 9 (noting that a claim that the plea proceedings were infected by
constitutionally deficient assistance of counsel could fall within miscarriage of justice exception).
However, this Court’s findings (1) that Falcon’s claim concerning promises made by his counsel in
connection with his plea was belied by his denial of that fact in open court at his plea hearing (Le gm
at 6), and (2) that there was no ineffective assistance at the plea stage (or otherwise), preclude any
reliance on this exception

15 This Court is aware that Mabry and Nunez involved waivers of not only a direct appeal but
also of the right to collateral review --in contrast to Falcon’s waiver of direct appeal only. However, the
difference in scope of the waiver does not affect the result here. This Court does not find that Falcon is
barred from bringing the instant §2255 motion to vacate but only that the claims asserted therein are
without merit, for the reasons set forth M.

16 This Court is mindful of the Government’s suggestion that a hearing be conducted on this

claim, in view of the refusal by both of Falcon’s counsel to respond to the Government’s inquiries on this
matter without a waiver of attorney-client privilege. (Gov’t. Mem. at 4.) However, in view of this
Court’s analysis, such a hearing is not necessary, because even assuming that Falcon requested Attomey
D’Ambrosio to file an appeal, he still could not show that counsel’s failure to do so was deficient g
Nunez, 546 F.3d at 455 (“With the waiver in force, counsel’s duty to protect his client’s interest militates
against filing an appeal.”) (emphasis added). Other Courts have likewise denied a hearing in similar, if
not identical, circumstances § §g; Arevalo, 2010 WL 5391459 at *1-*2 (finding no hearing to be
necessary in denying relief under §2255 where defendant pled guilty and signed a plea agreement
waiving right to both direct appeal and collateral review).

_]4_

D. Motion to Amend

Falcon’s motion to amend his §2255 motion to vacate seeks to add claims of police
misconduct, tampering with evidence, obstruction of j ustice, as well as ineffective assistance claims
that his counsel (a) failed to properly investigate the Government’s evidence and to raise certain
issues (not specified) related to that evidence,17 He claims that counsel failed to investigate his
allegations of missing cash and jewelry and denials of responsibility for a certain quantity of drugs
attributed to him. Falcon seeks an evidentiary hearing on these claims

The motion to amend fails for at least two reasons First, the proposed amended claims do
not relate back, as required by Fed. R. Civ. P. 15, and thus they are procedurally barred A federal
prisoner’s efforts to amend his § 2255 motion are governed by Fed. R. Civ. P. 15. § United States
v. Ciampi, 419 F.3d 20, 23 (lst Cir. 2005). Under Rule 15, an untimely pleading amendment to a
§ 2255 habeas motion may only be allowed if the amendments “relate back” to the timely filed
original pleading -- i.e., “the claim asserted in the amended plea ‘arose out of the conduct,
transaction, or occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading ”’ Ig. (quoting
Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(c)(2)).18 ln the habeas corpus context, “the Rule 15 ‘relation back’ provision is
strictly construed, in light of ‘Congress’ decision to expedite collateral attacks by placing stringent
time restrictions on [them].”’ Ll. (quoting Maer v. Felix, 545 U.S. 644, 657 (2005)). “Accordingly,

amended habeas corpus claims generally must arise from the ‘same core facts, ’ and not depend upon

 

17 The new claims were apparently prompted by the indictments in 2010 of Alfred Hamlin and

Providence Police detective Robert Enright, among others, for allegedly leading or participating in a
cocaine ring involving other police officers and drug dealers

18 In Ciampi, the Court of Appeals rejected petitioner’s motion to amend his 2255 pleading,

finding inter alia that the proposed new ineffective assistance claim -- involving an allegation that his
attorney failed to advise him regarding the appellate waiver in his plea agreement -- did not arise from
the same core facts as his initial claim challenging the Court’s explanation of the appeal waiver during
the Rule 11 colloquy. B Ciampi, 419 F.3d at 24.

_15_

events which are separate both in time and type from the events upon which the original claims
depended.” lit at 24.

Here, Falcon’s allegations concerning discrepancies in cash found at his residence and in
drug amounts attributable to him and concerning the failure of his counsel to investigate these
discrepancies bear no relation to his initial allegations concerning his counsel’s promises about his
potential sentence and counsel’s failure to file an appeal. Thus, because the new claims do not relate
back, they are untimely filed and must be rejected §e_e 28 U.S.C. § 2255(h); M, 419 F.3d at 24-
25.

Second, the proposed claims, even if considered on the merits, fall well short of stating any
claim warranting relief. In his motion to amend and accompanying papers, Falcon has produced no
evidence that either Hamlin or Enright had any direct involvement in his drug arrest or prosecution
in this matter. Much of his supporting affidavit merely re-hashes his initial claim concerning his plea
agreement and guilty plea; the paragraphs that mention Hamlin and Enright merely aver that Falcon
had some drug dealings with Hamlin prior to his arrest and that Enright was present on the night of
Falcon’s arrest and at some of Falcon’s court hearings (E Falcon Aff. dated December 8, 2010,
1]1[ 5-7, 9, 16.)19 There is no allegation that either Hamlin or Enright participated in the search or
arrest of F alcon or had any knowledge or involvement with the drugs that were found in the Prospect
Street and Denver Street apartments20

In short, none of the new allegations comes close to stating any claim concerning any

 

19 To the extent that the proposed amended claims attempt to challenge the quantity of drugs for
which Falcon was held responsible or to otherwise contest guilt, they could not prevail given his
admissions during his plea colloquy, as discussed supra.

20 This Court notes that the Government advises that the charges against Enright have since
been dismissed (Govt Mem. at 8, n. 1.)
_16_

tampering or fabrication of evidence or interference with the investigation and arrest of Falcon in
this matter.21 The motion and supporting papers are devoid of any facts that would draw into
question the validity of Falcon’s conviction and sentence. It follows that adding the proposed new
claims would be an exercise in futility. § Muskat v. United States, 554 F.3d 183, 195-96 (lst Cir.
2009) ("The law is settled that futility is a sufficient basis for denying leave to file an amended
complaint.") (citing Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178, 182 (1962)).

Accordingly, the motion to amend and the accompanying request for evidentiary hearing

must be denied

This Court has considered all of Falcon’s other arguments and finds them to be without
merit
CONCLUSION
ln view of the foregoing considerations Falcon’s motion to vacate pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 2255 is hereby DENIED and dismissed In addition, Falcon’s motion to amend and his

accompanying motion for an evidentiary hearing are likewise DENIED.

RULING ON CERTIFICATE OF APPEALABILITY
Pursuant to Rule ll(a) of the Rules Governing § 2255 Proceedings in the United States
District Courts (“§ 2255 Rules”), this Court hereby finds that this case is appropriate for the issuance

of a certificate of appealability (COA), solely as to the issue of whether counsel’s failure to file

 

21 Even if an inference could be drawn that Enright’s presence at Falcon’s post-arrest

interrogation and subsequent court hearings was to monitor whether Falcon might implicate either
Hamlin or him in any criminal activity, this has no impact on Falcon’s guilt of the offenses of which he
was convicted in this case. Falcon’s allegations that certain of his cash and jewelry were unaccounted
for are similarly irrelevant to the issues here.

_ 1 7_

an appeal, despite Falcon’s request that he do so, constituted ineffective assistance of counsel,
where Falcon had signed -- and was fiilly advised concerning -- a waiver of appeal as part of his
plea agreement This COA is granted in view of the fact that the First Circuit has not ruled on
this precise issue. As to this issue, Falcon has made a substantial showing of the denial of a
constitutional right, as required by 28 U.S.C. § 2253(c)(2) -- i.e., that the claim is “debatable
among jurists of reason.” McGonagle v. United States, 137 Fed. Appx. 373 at *1 (lst Cir. 2005)
(citing Miller-El v. Cockrell, 537 U.S. 322, 336 (2003)).

This Court further finds that as to all remaining claims, Falcon has failed to make a
substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional right, as required by 28 U.S.C. §2253(0)(2),
and thus the issuance of a COA is n_ot appropriate as to those claims

Falcon is advised that any appeal filed pursuant to the COA granted must be filed within
the time period provided by Rule 4(a) of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure. § §2255
Rule 11(b). Falcon is further advised that any motion to reconsider this ruling will not extend the

time to file a notice of appeal in this matter. § § 2255 Rule ll(a).

SO ORDERED:

Mary M. asi

Chief United States District Judge

Date: Februarya??, 2011

_18_

