§AO 245B(05-MA) (Rev. 06/05} Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet l - D. Massachusetts - 10f05

 

 

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COLJRT

District of Massachusetts

 

 

 

 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE
V.
LUIS COL°N case Number: 1= 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
USM Number: 93353~038
James P. Duggan
D° " is A“°mey IZI Aadiuonal documents attached
Preliminary Order of Forfeiture
l`.'_`l
THE DEFENDANT: ,
m denied guilty m mm(s) l of the lndlctment on 3/3/11
pleaded nolo contendere to oount(s)
which was accepted by the court.
m was found guilty on count(s)
after a plea of not guilty.
The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these offenses: Additionai Counts - See continuation page n
Iitls..&§sdsn aluminum maitland §s.tm.t
18 USC § 922(3)(1) Felon in Possession of a Fireann and Ammtmition 05/13/10 1 ofl

The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 thmugh ] ] of this judgment The sentence is imposed pursuant to
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

m The defendant has been found not guilty on oount(s)
m Count(s) I:l is ij are dismissed on the motion of the United States.

 

 

_ ' lt is ordered that the defendgnt must notify the United States attorney for this district within 30 da s of _ y cl;erx‘t‘ge of name, residence,
or mml:&.meddress until,all fines, resttmtlon,_costs, and s clal assessmetts_ imposed l_>y this judgment are fu ly pat . If ered to pay restitution,
the def must notify the court and Umted States mey of material changes m economic cue ces.

 

 

 

’I'he Honorable \Dougias P. Woodlock

ludge, U.S. District Court
Name Titie of lodge

%nl¢/’

 

 

§AO 24SB{OS~MA) (Rev. 06/05} Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 2 ~ D. Massachusetts - 10.'05

 

DEFENDANT: LUIS COLON
cAsi-: NUMBER: 1: 10 CR 10sz - 001 - DPw

lMPRISONMENT
The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a
total term oft 30 month(§)

DEFENDANT SHALL RECEIVE CREDIT FOR TIME SERVED.

m The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant be designated to a facility commensurate with
security which is closest to the defendant’s family in Massachusetts.

The defendant is remanded to me custody of the United states Ma»shal.

l:| The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this districts
Eat E| a.m. l:l p.m. on
l::\as notified by the United States Marshal.

 

 

m The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons:
Ebefore 2 p.m. on
mas notified by the United States Marshal.

m as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Scrvices Offioe.

 

 

 

 

 

RETURN
I have executed this judgment as follows:
Defendant delivered on to
a , with a certified copy of this judgment
UNITED STATES MARSHAL
By

 

DEPUTY UN]TED S'I`ATES MA.RSHAL

§AO %SB(OS-MA) (Rev. 06{05) .ludgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 2A - D. Massachusetts - 10/05

       

l ' t_Psge or

DEFENDANT: LIHS COLON
CASE NUMBER¢ 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
ADDrTIONAL RECOMMENDATIQNS To ran

h-_txn - g.ta, rata H.+V‘

BUREAU OF PRISONS

11 '_ tr t .`,,

         

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant be designated to a facility commensurate with
security at which he can complete all GED requirements and obtain further educational/vocational training to
prepare him to enter the workforce upon his release from imprisonment

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant be designated to an institution commensurate
with security where the Bureau of Prisons can afford appropriate medical care for the defendant’s documented
medical needs and afford appropriate psychiatric/psychological care for the defendant’s documented mental
health needs.

mac 24satos-MA) (iitv. oeros) Judgmettt in a cardinal case
sheets - D. Matstthttseat - ioros

     

J…»-Pe " ' ' 11

 

LUIS COLON

DEFENDANT:
CASE NUMBER: 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW

sUPERVIsEn RELEASE |Z| a.t.,.tt...ttt.. ,.g.
Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of : 3 y¢m'(S)

The defendant must report to the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release from the
custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state or local crime.

The defendant shall not unlawfully,possess a controlled substance The defenth shall refrain from any unlawful use of a controlled
substance The defendant shall su mit to one dru_g test within 15 days of release from imprisonment and at least two periodic drug tests
therea&er, not to exceed 104 tests per year, as directed by the probation officer.

The above drug testing condition is suspended, based on the court’s determination that the defendant poses a low risk of
future substance abuse. (Check, if applicable.)

The defendant shall not possess a firearm, ammunition, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon (Check, if applicable.)
m The defendant shall cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

|:l The defendant shall register with the state sex offender registration agency in the state where the defendant resides, works, or is a
student, as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

E The defendant shall participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (Chcck, if applicable.)

If this 'u cut imposes a fine or restitution, it is a condition of su rvised release that the defendant a in accordance with the
Schedule ollPi§rnrients sheet of this judgment pc p y

The defendant must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court as well as with any additional conditions
on the attached page.

STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

1) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district without the permission of the court or probation officer;

2) the lt;lcfend“i:nt shall report to the probation officer and shall submit a truthful and complete written report within the first five days of
eac mon ;

3) the defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the instructions of the probation officer;
4) the defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities;

5) the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation, unless excused by the probation officer for schooling, training, or other
acceptable reasons;

6) the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employment;

7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not purchase, possess, use, distribute, or administer any
controlled substance or any paraphernalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician;

8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed or administered;

9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons en §ed in criminal activity and shall not associate with any person convicted of a
felony, unless granted permission to do so by the pro on oflicer;

10) the defendant shall permit a_ probation officer to yisit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shall permit confiscation of any
contraband observed in plain view of the probation officer;

1 l) the defendant shall notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer;

12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency without the
permission of the court; and

13) as directed by the ro_bation officer, the defendant shall notify_third parties _of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant’s criminal
record or person 'history_ or characteristics and shall permit the probation officer to make such notifications and to confirm the
defendant s compliance with such notification requirement

 

§AO 245B(05-MA) (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Shcet 4A - Continuation Pege - Supcrvised Release/Probation -10/05

J“dsm¢nt-Pase ._..i.._ or
DEFENDANT: wis COLON
CASE NUMBER: i: 10 CR 10sz - 001 - DPW

ADDI'I'IONALIZ SUPERVISED RELEASEUPROBATION TERMS

DEFENDANT IS TO PARTICIPATE IN A PROGRAM FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE AS DIRECTED BY
THE US PROBA'I`ION OFFICE, WHICH PROGRAM MAY INCLUDE TES'I'ING, NOT TO EXCEED 104
DRUG TES'I'S PER YEAR_, TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE DEFENDANT HAS REVERTED TO THE
USE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS. THE DEFENDANT SHALL BE REQUIRED TO CONTRIBUTE TO
THE COSTS OF SERVICES FOR SUCH TREATMENT BASED ON THE ABILITY TO PAY OR
AVAILABILITY OF THIRD PARTY PAYMENT.

DEFENDANT IS TO PARTICIPATE IN A MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT PROGRAM AS
DIRECTED BY THE US PROBATION OFFICE. THE DEFENDANT SHALL BE REQUIR.ED TO
CONTRIBUTE TO THE COSTS OF SERVICES FOR SUCH TREATMENT BASED ON THE ABILITY
TO PAY OR AVAILABILITY OF THIRD PARTY PAYMENT.

Continuation of Conditions of i:lSupervised Release |:| Probation

§AO 24SB(OS-MA) (Rev. 06!'05) Judgmcnt in a Criminal CBS€
Shcet 5 - D. Massachusetts -10/05
DEFENDANT; wis C°LON
CASE NUMBER; 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

imm_i>age 6 ar 11

The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under the schedule of payments on Sheet 6.

Anomnrt flsa limitation
TOTALS s 3100.00 $ s

The determination of restitution is deferred until . An Amended Judgment in a Crr`mr'nai Case (AO 245C) will be entered
after such determination

m The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed below.

If the defendant makesa aitial a ment, each a eeshallreceivean roximatel ro iti_ ed ment, unless s ified otherwise in
th . . P P y l’ ge app Us. 6646;*¥ P°°.

e priority order or percen e a ment column low. However, ursurmt w 18 . 3 , ali nonfederal victims must be id
before the United States is §a%d.p y p § pa
maritime _T_iitaLl.nn: wm £daritii.ar.l’.ei:eentau

See Continuation
Page

To'rALs s $0.00 s §0.00

 

E Restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement $

 

m The defendant must pay interest on restitution and a fine of more than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
fifteenth day afterthe date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(f). All ofthe payment options on Sheet 6 may be subject
to penalties for delinquency and defaul't, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

m The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay interest and it is ordered that:
l:| the interest requirement is waived for the m fine |:’ restitution
m the interest requirement for the m fine n restitution is modified as follows:

* Findin forthe total amount of losses are re 'red under Ch 109A, 1 10, l lOA, l 1 A f T'tl l f '
Septembg; 13’ 1994’ but before Apdl 23’ 199%ui apters and 3 o i e 8 oroffenses committed on or after

er zasaros-MA) {R¢v. 06105) rudgmem inn a Crimimr case
sheer 6 - D. Masswhuseus - 10/05

ludgment - Page 7 of 11
DEFENDANT: LUIS COLON ___

CASE NUMBER: 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW

SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant’s ability to pay, payment of the total criminal monetary penalties are due as follows:

A m Lump sum payment of $ due immediately, balance due

not later than , or
in accordance m C, |:| D, |:| E,or |:]F below; or

B m Payment to begin immediately (may be combined with [:\ C, m D, or ij F below); or

[:| Payment in equal
(e.g., months or ycars), to commence

f')

(e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g., 30 or 60 days) after the date of this judgment; or

 

 

 

D [_] Payment in equal
(e.g., months or years), to commence
term of supervision; or

(e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release ii‘orn imprisonment to a

 

 

E g Payment during the term of supervised release will commence within (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from
imprisonment The court will set the payment plan based on an assessment of the defendant’s ability to pay at that time; or

F 4 Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penalties:

DEFENDANT SHALL PAY THE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT OF $100.00, IMMEDIATELY OR
ACCO-RDING TO A PAYMENT PLAN ESTABLISHED BY THE COURT IN CONSULTATION WITH
THE PROBATION OFFICER, IF NOT PAID IN FULL BEFORE RELEASE FROM PRISON TH_ROUGH A
BUREAU OF PRISONS FINANCIAL RESPONSIBlLITY PROGRAM.

Unless the court has expressl ordered otherwis_e, if thisjud%nent imposes imprisonment merit of criminal monetary penalties is due durin
imprisonment All crrmin mon penalties, except ose payments made tlu'oiigli)‘i Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Inmate Financia
Responsrbrlrty Prograni, are made to e clerk of the court

The defendant shall receive credit for all payments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.

EJoint and Several ij gee COntinuat\On
age

Defendant and Co-Defendarit Narnes and Case Numbers (inc}uding defendant number), Total Amount, Joint and Several Amount,
and corresponding payee, if appropriate

m The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution
m The defendant shall pay the following court cost(s):
E'I`he defenth shall forfeit the defendant’s interest in the following property to the United States:

Pa merits shail be applied in the following order: (l assessment, 2 restitution 'nci , 3 restitution interes 4 fine rinci al,
(S)ytine interest, (6) community restitution, (7) pe 'es, and (8) oi)s)ts, includingplclost B?pr(ogecution and court i>’o(stg P p

AO 2453 (Rev. 06/05) Criminal Judgment
Attacl~a'nent (P ' l) -- Statement ofReasons - D. Massachusetts - 10/05 n

  

   

DEFENDANT: LUIS COLON Judgment-Page 8 of ll
CASE NUMBERZ 12 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
DISTRICT= MAssAcrrusETTs

STATEMENT OF REASONS

I COURT FIND!NGS ON PRESENTENCE INVESTIGATION REPORT

A ij The court adopts the presentence investigation report without chan¢e.

B l:l The court adopts the presentence investigation report with the following changes.
(Check all that apply and specify court determination findings, or comrrients, referencing paragraph numbers in the presentence report, if applicable.)
(Use Sectr`on VIIl if necessary.)

l \:l Cliapter Two of tlie U.S.S.G. Manual detemii`nations by court (iricluding changes to base offense level, or
specific offense characteristics):

2 [] Clapter Tliree of the U.S.S.G. Maairal determinations by court (i`ncluding changes to victim-related adjustrnents,
role in the offense, obstruction ofjustice, multiple counts, or acceptance of responsibility):

3 m Cltapter Foar of the U.S.S.G. Maaiial determinations by court (including changes to criminal history category or
scores, career o§ender, or criminal livelihood detemiinations):

4 l:l Addltioaal Commeats or Findiiigs (including comments or factual findings concerning certain information in the
presentence report that the Federal Bureau of Prisons may rely on when it makes inmate classification designation
or programming decisions):

C l:l The record establishes no need for a presentence investigation report pursuant to Fed.R.Crlni.P. 32.

II COURT FINDING ON MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCE (Checl< all that apply.)
A d No count of conviction carries a mandatory minimum sentencel

B m Mandatory minimum sentence imposed

C i:] One or rriore counts of conviction alleged in the indictment carry a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment but the
sentence imposed is belowamandatory minimumterm because diecourthasdetermiriedthattiie mandatory minimum
does not apply based on
[:] findings offset in this case
[] subsumed assism(is U.s.C. § 3553(=))

[] nn statutory safety vaiv¢ us u.s.c. § ssss(n)

III COURT DETERMINATION OF ADVISORY GUIDELINE RANGE (BEFORE DEPARTURES):

Total Offense Level: 19

Criminal History Category: 1

Imprisonment Range: 30 to 37 months
Supervised Release erge: 2 to 3 years
Fine Range: $ 6,000 fO $ 60.000

la F inc waived or below the guideline range because of inability to pay.

 

no 2455 (os-MA) (n¢v. 06/05) criminal Judgnem

Attactnnent(E 2)- Sts:tementofReasons - D. Massachusetts- 10/05

DEFENDANT; LUIS COLON ludgment~Ps.ge 9 of 11

CASE NUMBER: 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
DISTRICT= MAssACHUsETTs

STATEMENT OF REASONS

IV ADV!SORY GUIDELINE SENTENCING DETERMINATION (Check only one.)

A m The sentence is within an advisory guideline range that is lot greater than 24 months and the court linda no reason to depart

B m The sentence is within an advisory guideline range that b greater than 24 months, and the lpeelhc sentence is imposed for these reasons
(Use Section Vlll if necessary.)

C I:] The court departs from the advisory guideline range for reaaoas authorized by the sentencing guidelines manaL
(Also complete Section V.)

D [___I The court imposed a sentence outside the advisory sentencing guideline system (Also complete Section V[.)

V DE¥ARTURES AUTHORIZED BY THE ADVISORY SENTENCING GUlDELINES (If applicable.)

A The sentence imposed departs (Check only one.):
[:] below the advisory guideline range
fl above the advisory guideline range

B Departure based on (Check all that apply.):

l Plea Agreement (Check all that apply and check reason(s) below.):

5K1.1 plea agreement based on the defendant’s substantial assistance

5K3.1 plea agreement based on Early Disposition or “Fast~track" Program

binding plea agreement for departure accepted by the court

plea agreement for departure, which the court finds to be reasonable

plea agreement that states that the government will not oppose a defense departure motion.

2 Motion Not Addressed in a Plea Agreelnent (Check all that apply and check reason(s} below.):
['_'] 5K1.1 government motion based on the defendant’s substantial assistance
[] 5K3.1 government motion based on Early Disposition or “Fast-track" program
[:] government motion for departure
ij defense motion for departure to which the government did not object
|:] defense motion for departure to which the government objected

3 Other
l:l Other than a plea agreement or motion by the parties for departure (Check reason(s) below.):

|Iil:ll:l|'_'l|:]

C Reasol(s) for Departure (Check all that apply other than 5Kl.l or SKS.I.)

5K2.l Death

5K2.2 Physical Injury

5K2_3 Extreme Psychological Injuty
5K2.4 Abduction or Unlawful Restraint
5K2.5 Propelty Damage or boss

5K2.6 Weapon or Dangerous Weapon
5K2.7 Disruption of Government Function
5K2.8 Exl:reme Conduct

51<2.9 Crirninal Purpose

5K2. 10 Victim’s Conduct

5K2.l l lesser Harm

5K2112 Coercion and Duress

5K2. 13 Diminished Capmity

5K2. 14 Public Welfare

SK?.. 16 Voluntary Disclosun= chft`ense
5K2.l7 High-Capecity, Semiautomatic Weapon
5K2.18 Violent Street Gang

5K2.20 Aberrant Behavior

5K2.21 Dismisscd and Uncharged Conduct
5K2.22 Age or Health of Sex Offenders
SK2.23 Discharged Terms of lmprisonment
Other guideline basis (e.g.. 2B l .l commentary)

4Al .3 Cn`minal History inadequacy

5Hl .l Age

SHl .2 Education and Vocational Skills

5Hli3 Mental and Emotional Condition

$Hl .4 Physical Condition

5Hl . 5 Employment Record

SHl .6 Fami|y Ties and Responsibilities

SHl , ll Military Record, Charitable Service,
Good Works

SKZ .0 Aggravaring or Mitiga.u'ng Circumstances

l:l UEEEI:||'_`I[:I[]
l:|[:|l:||`_`]|:l|:|l:||:|[]|§
l:||:|[]|]l:ll:ll:ll___llj[]l:l[:i

D Explain the facts justifylng the departure (Use Section VI{I if necessary.)

Ao 2453 ( os-MA) (R¢v. 06/05) criminal moment

Attachment (W 3) - Statement of Reasons - D. Massachusetts 10/05

DEFENDANT: LUIS CoLON Judgment-Page 10 of 11
CASE NUMBER= 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
DISTRICT¢ MAssACHUsET'rs

STATEMENT OF REASONS

VI COUR'I' DETERMINATION FOR SENTENCE OUTSIDE THE ADV¥SORY GUIDELINE S¥STEM
(Check di that apply.)

A The sentence imposed is (Check only one.):
g below the advisory guideline range

i:l above the advisory guideline range
B Sentence imposed pursuant to (Check all that apply.):

l Plea Agreement (Check all that apply and check reason(s) below.):
[___| binding plea agreement for a sentence outside the advisory guideline system ucepted by the court
m plea agreement for a sentence outside the advisory guideline system, which the court finds to be reasonable
g plea agreement that states that the government will not oppose a defense motion to the court to sentence outside the advisory guideline
system

2 Motion Not Addressed in a Plea Agreement (Check all that apply and check reason(s) below.):
g government motion for a sentence outside of the advisory guideline system
m defense motion for a sentence outside of the advisory guideline system to which the government did not object
[:| defense motion for a sentence outside of the advisory guideline system to which the govemment objected

3 Other
m Other than a plea agreement or motion by the parties for a sentence outside of the advisory guideline system (Check reason{s) below.):

C Reuon(s) for Sentence Outside the Advisory Guideline System (Cheek all that apply.)

I:l the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(l)

m to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense (lS U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A))
E_I m afford adequate deterrence w minn conduct us u.s.c. § 3553(3)(2)(3))

m to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant (l 8 U.S‘C. § 3553(a)(2)(C))

[:] to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner
(18 U.S.C. § 3553(a){2)(D))
n to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities among defendants (18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(6))

I:I to provide restitution to any victims of the offense ( 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a}(7))

D Explain the facts justifying a sentence outside the advisory guideline system. (UseSection VIII if necessary.)

AO 245B ( OS-MA) (Rev. 06!05) Crirninal ludgment
Auachment (P -_' 4)--Statement of Reasons ~ D. Massachusetts - 10/05 7 __

     

LUIS COLON Judgment -» Page 1 1 of 1 1

DEFENDANT;
cASE NUMBER; 1: 10 CR 10285 - 001 - DPW
DISTRICT: mssAcHUsErrs
STATEMENT OF REASONS

VII COURT DETERMINATIONS OF RESTITUT!ON
A m Restitution Not Applicable.

B Total Amount of Restitution:

 

C Restitution not ordered (Cheek only one.):

l [:] For offenses for which restitution is otherwise mandatory under 18 U.S.C. § 3663A, restimtion is not ordered because the number of
identifiable victims is so large as to make restitution impracticable under 18 U.S.C. § 3663A(c)(3)(A).

2 [J F or offenses for which restitution is otherwise mandatory under 18 U.S.C. § 3663A, restitution is not ordered because determining complex
issues offset and relating them to the cause or amount of the victims’ losses would complicate or prolong the sentencing process to a degree
that the need to provide restitution to any victim would be outweighed by the burden on the sentenc`ug process under 18 U.S.C. § 3663A(c)(3)(B).
3 [:] For other offenses for which restitution is authorized under 18 U.S.C. § 3663 and/or required by the sentencing guidelines, restitution is not
ordered because the complication and prolongation of the sentencing process resulting from the fashioning ofa restitution order outweigh
the need to provide restitution to any victims under lB U.S.C. § 3663(a)(l)(B)(ii).

4 l:l Restinition is not ordered for other reasons (Explain.)

D [] Partial restitution is ordered for these reasons (18 U.S.C. § 3553(c)):

Vlll ADDITIONAL FACTS JUSTIFYING THE SENTENCE IN THIS CASE (If applicable.)

Sections I, II, Hl, IV, and VH of the Statement of Reasons form must be completed in all felony cases.

Defendant’s Soc. Sec. No.: 000'00'8156

   
  

D¢fendam's one ofainh: ""/""/1978

Defendmt’s Residence Address: le‘hill-

 

The chenble Doud¢ P. Wood%oek Judge, U. S District Court

Defendant’s Mailing Address: Name md Titie
Date _Signed slm

r1
_~','.¥

UNITED sTATEs misrch count

 

-Dls'rlticr 0F ntessAcHUsErrs
UNITED sTATEs or AMERicA ` "‘)
v. § Criminal No. lO-cr-lt'lZ$S-DPW
wis coLoN, a/k/a “Goldo”, §
Defendant. )
woooLocl<, D.J.

WHEREAS, on Septe`mber 9.,. 29103,‘41 federal grand jury sitting in the District of
Massachusetts returned a one-count Indictrnent charging defenth Luis Colon, a/k/s “Goldo”
(the “Defendant”) with felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition, in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 922(3)(1) (Count One);

WHEREAS, the Indictment also `contained a forfeiture allegation, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §
924(d) and 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c), which provided notice that the United States sought the
forfeiture upon conviction of the Defendant of any offense alleged in Count One of the
Indictment, of all firearms and ammunition‘invo|ved in the commission of the offense Such
property specifically included, without limitation:

a. a .223 caliber CN Romarm semi-automatic rifle, model WASR 10, bearing
serial number 1-54938-03, and one magazine containing 30 live cartridges of .223
caliber ammunition (the “Property”);

WHEREAS, the Indictment further provided that, ifsny of the above-described
forfeitable property, as a result of any actor omission by the Defendant, (a) cannot be located
upon the exercise of due diligence; (b) has been transfer or sold to, or deposin with, a third

party; (c) has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the Court; (d) has been substantially

diminished in value; or (e) has been commingied with other property which cannot be divided

without difficulty, the United States is entitled to seek forfeiture of any other property of the
Defendant, up to the value of such assets, pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 853(p), as incorporated in 28
U.S.C. § 2461(¢);

WHEREAS, on March 3, 2011, ata hearing pursuant to Rule ll of the Federal Rules of
Criminai Procedure, the Defendant pled guilty to Count One of the Indictment, thereby
consenting to the forfeiture of all of his interests in the Property;

WHEREAS, in light of the Defendant’s guilty plea, the United States has established the
requisite nexus between the Property and the offenses to which the Defendant pled guilty, such
that the Property is subject to forfeiture to the United States pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(d) and
28 U.S.C. § 2461(c); and

WHEREAS, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(d), 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c), and Rulc 32.2(b)(2) of
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the United States is now entitled to a Preliminary Order
of Forfeiture against the Property.

ACCORDINGLY, it is hereby ORDERED, ADIUDGED, AND DECREED that:

1. The Court iinds, pursuant to Rule 32.2(1))(1) of the Federal Rules of Criminal
Procedure, that the government has established the requisite nexus between the Property and the
offense to which the Defendant pled guilty.

2. Accordingly, ail of the Dcfendant’s interests in the Property are hereby forfeited
to the United States of America for disposition pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(d) and 28 U.S.C. §
2461(¢).

3. Pursuant to Rule 32.2(b)(3) of the Federal Rules ofCriminal Procedure, the

United States is hereby authorized to seize the Property and maintain it in its secure custody and

control.

4. Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 853(n)(1), as incorporated in 28 U.S.C. § 246l(c), the
United States shall publish, for thirty (30) consecutive calendar days on the government
forfeiture website M_fq_;fejgg_e_,ggy, notice of the Prelimina.ty Order of Porfeiture and notice
of the United States’ intent to dispose of the Property.

5. Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 853(n)(l), as incorporated in 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c), the
United States shall give, to the extent practicable, direct written notice to any person known to
have alleged an interest in the Property to be forfeited.

6. Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 853(n)(2) and (3), as incorporated in 28 U.S.C. § 2461(¢),
the notice referred to above shall state: (a) that any person, other than the Defcndant, asserting a
legal interest in the Property, shall, within sixty (60) days after the first day of publication on the
government forfeiture website or within thirty (30) days after receipt of actual notice, whichever
is earlier, tile a petition with the United States District Court in Boston, Massachusetts,
requesting a hearing to adjudicate the validity of his or her interest in the Property; and (b) that
the petition shall be signed by the petitioner under the penalty of perjury and shall set forth the
nature and extent of the petitioner’s right, titie, or interest in the Property; the time and
circumstances of the petitioner’s acquisition of the right, title, or interest in the Property; any
additional facts supporting the petitioner’s claim; and the relief sought

7. Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 853(n)(7), as incorporated in 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c),
following the Court’s disposition of all petitions filed under 21 U.S.C. § 853(n)(6), or if no such
petitions are filed following the expiration of the period provided in 21 U.S.C. § 85 3(n)(2) for

the filing of such petitions, the United States ofAmerica shall have clear title to the Property.

8. Upon adjudication of all third party interests, this Court will enter a Final Order
of Forfeiture, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(d), 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c), and Rule 32.2(c) of the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, in which ail interests will be addressed

9. Pursuant to Rule 32.2(b)(4) of the F ederal Rules cf Crimina| Procedure, this
Preliminary Order of Forfeiture will become final as to the Defendant at the time of his
sentencing, will be part of the Defendant’s criminal sentence, and will be included in the

criminal judgment entered by this Court against him.

/J.n.%/Mt

DOUciLAs P. woolwch
United States District lodge

mm lt fitted

 

