                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

       v.                                                              CR99'-091 ML

JOSE A. DIAZ


                                MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

       This matter is before the Court on the order of the First Circuit Court of Appeals directing

this Court to determine whether Defendant, Jose A. Diaz ("Defendant") has timely filed a notice

of appeal of this Court's denial of his motion to reduce sentence.

                                     Background and Analysis

       On July 12, 2011, Defendant filed a notice of appeal pro se of this Court's denial, on June

27,2011, of his motion to reduce sentence. Defendant's notice of appeal, however, was due by

July 11,2011. See generally Fed. R. App. P. 4(b)(I) (in a criminal case, a defendant's notice of

appeal must be filed in the district court within 14 days after the entry of the order being

appealed); see also Fed. R. App. P. 26 (computation oftime). Consequently, as noted by the

First Circuit, the notice of appeal facially appeared to have been filed out oftime.

       At the time of the filing of his notice of appeal, however, Defendant was incarcerated in

Florida. If an inmate

       confined in an institution files a notice of appeal in ... a criminal case, the notice
       is timely if it is deposited in the institution's internal mail system on or before the
       last day for filing. If an institution has a system designed for legal mail, the
       inmate must use that system to receive the benefit of this rule. Timely filing may
       be shown by a declaration in compliance with 28 U.S.C. ยง 1746 or by a notarized
       statement, either of which must set forth the date of deposit and state that first-


                                                  1
         class postage has been prepaid.

Fed. R. App. P. 4(c)(l); see generally United States v. Correa-Torres, 326 F.3d 18 (1st Cir.

2003).

         Defendant's notice of appeal is undated and includes no declaration or notarized

statement. In this instance, however, based on these particular circumstances, the Court gives

Defendant the benefit of the doubt as it seems entirely plausible that Defendant gave his notice of

appeal to prison authorities for mailing on or before July 11, 2011, and this Court received his

notice of appeal on July 12, 2011.

                                            Conclusion

         The Court finds that Defendant's notice of appeal was timely filed pursuant to Fed. R.

App. P. 4(c)(1).



SO ORDERED.

/s/ Mary M. Lisi
MaryM. Lisi
Chief United States District Judge
August 4, 2011.




                                                 2
