                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                     )
                                             )
v.                                           )             No. 2:10-mj-179-JHR
                                             )             SEALED
DUSTIN GILBERT,                              )
                                             )
               Defendant                     )


RECOMMENDED DECISION ON DEFENDANT’S COMPETENCY TO STAND TRIAL


       On November 9, 2010, I granted the parties’ joint motion for a mental examination of the

defendant pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 4241(a) and (b) and 4247(b) and (c) to determine whether he

was competent to stand trial.     See Docket Nos. 11, 21.      On January 19, 2011, over the

defendant’s objection, I granted the government’s motion for a 15-day extension to complete its

forensic evaluation of the defendant. See Docket Nos. 22-25.

       On November 17, 2010, in anticipation of the defendant’s transfer to a Bureau of Prisons

medical facility for evaluation, he was transferred from the Cumberland County Jail in Portland,

Maine, to the Strafford County Jail in Dover, New Hampshire. See Docket No. 24 at [1]. On

December 3, 2010, he was transferred to the Federal Medical Center in Ayer, Massachusetts

(“FMC-Devens”), where he was evaluated until January 11, 2011. See id. at [2]. He was

subsequently returned to the Strafford County Jail.

       On or about February 9, 2011, I received the report dated February 3, 2011, of FMC-

Devens forensic psychologist Shawn E. Channell, Ph.D., ABPP, relaying his opinion that (i) the

defendant’s ability to understand the nature and consequences of the proceedings against him

and his ability to appropriately assist in his defense are significantly impaired by symptoms of



                                                 1
Bipolar I Disorder, (ii) commitment for further evaluation and treatment for restoration of

competency pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 4241(d) might allow the defendant to become stabilized on

medication and gain a level of competency that would allow him to proceed with his case, and

(iii) involuntary treatment with medication might be needed to restore the defendant to

competency.

       On February 23, 2011, I held a conference with counsel, following which I presided over

a hearing pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 4241(c) and 4247(d) during which the defendant, his counsel,

and counsel for the government were present.

       During the pre-hearing conference, counsel for both sides expressed agreement with the

conclusions and recommendations of Dr. Channell. The defendant’s counsel explained at some

length why he took this position despite his client’s strenuous protestations that he does not

suffer from a mental illness and is competent to stand trial, and why, as counsel, he deemed it

inappropriate, and not in his client’s best interests, to take instructions from him on this matter at

this time. The defendant’s counsel described a meeting with his client on February 14, 2011, at

the Strafford County Jail during which he found the defendant to be flagrantly delusional, with

the defendant having insisted that it is legal in New Hampshire to throw urine on correctional

officers, having informed counsel that he obtained that information by telepathic communication

with a friend, having attempted to communicate with the friend telepathically in counsel’s

presence, and having stated that he was a longtime CIA operative, a fact that he said could be

verified in a Social Security Index housed at the Portland Public Library. The defendant’s

counsel also stated that the defendant’s family has expressed great concern that the defendant’s

condition has been untreated.




                                                  2
       The defendant’s counsel advocated, without objection from the government, for the

immediate transfer of his client from the Strafford County Jail, a correctional facility, where he is

being held in a small, windowless cell without psychiatric treatment, to FMC-Devens, a facility

capable of providing psychiatric care and treatment. The government’s counsel stated that both

she and the defendant’s counsel participated in a conference call with Dr. Channell during which

Dr. Channell recommended that the defendant be transferred immediately to FMC-Devens and

advised that, if the defendant’s condition were deemed serious enough upon intake, emergency

involuntary treatment could be undertaken without a court order. The government’s counsel

added that Dr. Channell advised that, in the absence of either an emergency or the defendant’s

cooperation, a court order would be required for involuntary medication. Counsel indicated that

they would separately file forthwith a joint motion for the defendant’s immediate transfer to

FMC-Devens or other such suitable facility, and they have now done so, and I have granted the

same. See Docket Nos. 29, 31.

       During the hearing in open court, the government offered, and I admitted without

objection, a copy of Dr. Channell’s report. Both counsel advocated for the court’s adoption of

Dr. Channell’s conclusions and recommendations. I also permitted the defendant to speak. He

strongly objected to any conclusion that he suffers from a mental illness or is incompetent to

stand trial. Consistent with Dr. Channell’s report, I observed the defendant to be an intelligent

but highly troubled individual. He understood the nature of the charges against him and the roles

of key players in the judicial process, yet he also spoke of a conspiracy at the jail to place

cocaine in inmates’ food and displayed intemperate and volatile behavior in court.

       Based on the findings and recommendations in Dr. Channell’s report, counsel’s

agreement with those findings and recommendations, the defendant’s counsel’s report of his visit



                                                 3
with his client on February 14, 2011, and my own observations of the defendant in court on

February 23, 2011, I conclude, and recommend that the court find, that it is shown by a

preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is incompetent to stand trial.

       Should the court agree, I further recommend that it ORDER that:

       1.      The defendant be committed to the custody of the Attorney General for a

reasonable period of time, not to exceed 120 days, to receive treatment for his mental disease or

defect in an effort to render him competent and of capacity to permit the proceedings in this case

to go forward, as is mandatory upon an initial finding of incompetency to stand trial, see, e.g., 18

U.S.C. § 4241(d); United States v. Ferro, 321 F.3d 756, 761 (8th Cir. 2003); and

       2.      Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(1)(A), this period of commitment be excluded

from the time within which the trial of any offense must commence.

                                             NOTICE

        A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate judge’s report or
proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for
which de novo review by the district court is sought, together with a supporting memorandum
and request for oral argument before the district judge, if any is sought, within ten (10) days
after being served with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral
argument before the district judge shall be filed within ten (10) days after the filing of the
objection.

        Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de novo review
by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.

       Dated this 23rd day of February, 2011.

                                                     /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                     John H. Rich III
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 4
