                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                        FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                     )
     Plaintiff,                               )
                                              )
       v.                                     ) Crim. Action No. 10cr10029-NG
                                              )
JEAN JANVIER,                                 )
     Defendant.                               )
GERTNER, D.J.

     MEMORANDUM AND ORDER RE: DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO SUPPRESS
                          July 26, 2011

   The Memorandum and Order of July 11, 2011, is hereby amended and replaced by this
 Memorandum and Order due to formatting and typographical errors. Every other aspect of the
                             Memorandum remains intact.


       Jean Janvier ("Janvier") was arrested following an anonymous 911 call about a man with

a gun. That call, together with Janvier's behavior when the police arrived at his home, 17

Gleason Street, justified a stop under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. (1968), according to the police. I

disagree.

       The 911 information and the officer's observations supposedly led him to "run after"

Janvier on the steps leading to his apartment, then reach out and touch a gun in Janvier's

waistband. The fruits of the stop led to Janvier's arrest for unlawful possession of a firearm, a

firearm with altered serial numbers, and unlawful possession of ammunition.

       The problem is that the anonymous caller's description of "a man with a gun" did not

match Janvier's. The location identified in the call, at least as an initial matter, covered a number

of houses on Gleason Street, Dorchester, not merely Janvier's. And when the unmarked but very

obvious police car arrived, Janvier, who was standing on the small porch of his own home,
simply turned to go inside. Nothing about the call should have focused suspicion on him; and

nothing about his behavior at the scene justified the Terry stop.

       Defendant filed a motion to suppress the fruits of the search. The government opposed; I

held a hearing over two days, with multiple exhibits. While I greatly appreciate the need to put

an end to gun violence in Boston, and I understand that the area in which Janvier's home was

located was a "high crime area," there are rules -- constitutional rules -- that define how officials

must go about their investigations. Following the constitution makes for less efficient law

enforcement, to be sure, but, in the final analysis, far more legitimate. Defendant's Motion to

Suppress (document #17) is GRANTED.

I.     FACTS

       A.      The 911 Call

       Exhibit 1 to the December 29, 2010, suppression hearing is the 911 call tape, which the

Court has listened to several times. Some parts are difficult to understand. What follows is an

account of the call, reflecting a consensus account of its contents.

       At about 9:00 p.m. on October 25, 2009, the Boston Police Department ("BPD") received

a call over its emergency 911 system. The caller was a woman, who, after being advised that the

call was being recorded, was asked for the location of her emergency. She said it was Gleason

Street. When asked for further details, the caller said it was between "17, 18, 19 and 23."

Eventually she reported that the man was "standin' up on 18 Gleason Street."

       The caller reported that the man was "harassing" and that he was "trying to find 18

Gleason Street." She indicated that the man had a gun, that he "had it in his pocket, then he




                                                 -2-
threw it, then he put it in the back of his pants." When asked which back pocket the gun was in,

the caller told the operator that the man had the gun in "his waistband."

        The caller described the man as follows: He was black, less than 30 (although she later

said "like 26, 27, I'm not sure."). He was wearing black jeans, a white t-shirt, black hoodie

sweater, and black sneakers. She described his height as "maybe 5'6", 5''7" and weight, "umm

he's like, I don't know about, maybe . . .maybe 210," and that he had "low cut hair."

        The caller then complained to the operator about the questions she was being asked.

When asked for more details about the man's appearance, the caller hung up.1 She never gave

her name or address. She never expressed a willingness to be called back. While the testimony

suggested that some time later -- after Janvier's arrest -- the BPD was able to identify the

subscriber of the cell phone from which the call was made, no attempt was made to get in touch

with her.

        After receiving the report, the 911 operator sent out the message, dispatching police to

Gleason Street. Sgt. James Tarantino ("Tarantino") responded from an unmarked gang unit

cruiser, which he operated along with Gang Unit Officer Jack Conway ("Conway") and

Massachusetts State Trooper Steve Johnson ("Johnson").

        The radio operator advised these officers that, "Guys, its black male, black hoodie, white

shirt, black jeans, black sneakers, about 210, he has the gun in the back of his waistband." She

then added that the man was "about 5'7."




        1
           Exhibit 10, which was a computerized "incident history" noted that the caller "wouldn’t give any more
info, clr hung up." Suppression Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 89:24-25 Dec. 29, 2010 (document #26) [hereinafter "Hr'g Day 1
Tr."].

                                                        -3-
       Janvier did not meet the description. The weight, the sneakers, the pants, and the hoodie

did not match. He was wearing blue jeans and a dark jacket, but had on a white sweater with a

hood worn over a white shirt with a large design in the center. He wore white sneakers, and had

on a "big black puffy coat" like a bomber jacket. The height and race of the man was a closer

match; Janvier was 5' 8", Haitian, and 24 years old.

       But the most significant detail that did not match Janvier was his build: He was

considerably slighter than the description by 70 pounds. He weighed 140 pounds – not 210 –

which even the officer characterized as a "slim" build. Boston Police Dep't Booking Form and

Incident Report, 1 (document #19-3) [hereinafter "Police Report"]. As the officer noted, the

details that did match could not have been more generic – "dark top, black man in his 20's." Hr'g

Day 1 Tr. 64:3-7.

       The police saw no one else on Gleason Street but the three men outside of 17, not 18,

Gleason Street.

       B.         The Setting

       The setting of the stop was significant, so significant that the defense sought to have the

Court take a view of the area. When the Court denied that motion, the defendant prepared a

video,2 which I found to be highly probative.

       This was a residential area. Number 17 Gleason Street was a two family home with a

small porch. Janvier lived there with his parent and sisters. The house was surrounded by a

metal fence with a latched gate. There was a street light across the street, but the officer who

made the stop could not recall if there was any light on the porch. Two of Janvier's



       2
           Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 12:6-11, Ex. 7.

                                                -4-
acquaintances were standing in the driveway when the police arrived. At the entrance to the

house, one short stairway lead downstairs to one apartment; another lead upstairs to Janvier's

apartment. The stairway leading to Janvier's apartment had just four steps. A young man like

Janvier could get there in seconds from the front door.

         C.       High Crime Area

         As they responded to the call, Conway and his partners knew that this was an area

frequented by members of the Greenwood Street gang. They also knew there had been two

firearm incidents in the ten days before.3 Police Report, 2. Indeed, the data generated by the

BPD suggested this was a "high crime area." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 32:8-18.

         The cruiser was a silver Crown Victoria, which, though unmarked, was easily identified

as a police vehicle. Moreover, the officers were wearing their badges around their necks and at

least Conway was dressed in a black long sleeved t-shirt that said "Boston Police" on the front,

and "Gang Unit" on the back.

         D.       The Stop

         Conway testified that when they arrived at 17 Gleason Street, Janvier was on the porch of

his home, talking to his two friends who were in the driveway.4 The officers did not recognize

Janvier; they did recognize one of the individuals in the driveway. When Conway was

specifically asked if any of the three men matched the 911 description he was equivocal: "They




         3
            Exhibit 2B, generated by the Boston Regional Intelligence Center, suggested that the Greenwood Street
area in the area of Gleason Street is a "high crime area with respect to firearms." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 32:8-18 & 33:1-2,
Ex. 2B.
         4
          One of the men in the driveway was William Garrison, a Greenwood gang member, who in fact weighed
30 pounds more than Janvier. The second individual, Lawrence Reynolds, also was closer to the 911 caller’s
description in build than was Janvier. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 71:6-7, 23.

                                                         -5-
all kind of did with the dark clothing."5 Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 43:17. Conway spoke to the two in the

driveway; "What's up guys?" he said. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 46:6-7.

        Conway ran after Janvier into the house at 17 Gleason Street, because of Janvier's

behavior when the police arrived. Janvier, Conway testified, was trying to hide the gun, was

looking furtively from "left to right" and was "fleeing" into his home. But Conway's account of

Janvier's behavior on the porch shifted during the suppression hearing, differed from his previous

reports, and from an earlier hearing.

        During direct examination, Conway testified that, even though Janvier was talking to his

two friends who were in front of him -- necessarily facing them, with his back to his house --

Janvier's "back was somewhat exposed." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 43:11-13.6 Later, he acknowledged that

Janvier's back was not visible to him when he arrived. Indeed, given Janvier's position on the

porch, he did not have to do anything evasive to keep his back from view when the police

arrived. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 74:21-25.7 Moreover, Janvier was wearing a "puffy jacket" the very

jacket that the government later claimed justified the anonymous caller making a 70-pound

mistake in identifying him. That jacket, as the picture of Janvier suggests, fully covered his

back, including his waistband. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 52:22, Ex. 4A.




        5
          The comment was troubling, to say the least. This is a largely black neighborhood; the caller gave a
generic description of a black man that could have described many young men in the the neighborhood.
        6
           At an earlier hearing, Conway claimed that when Janvier saw Conway, he turned his back so that it was
out of the officer's view. Supervised Release Revocation Hr'g Tr. 12:17-19.
        7
          Officer Conway testified that the man on the porch was "blading" which meant "if I'm approaching
someone and they're concealing a weapon they turn that part of their body away from me, keeping that part away
from my view." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 26:16-18. As noted above, the testimony made no sense. Janvier was facing his
friends with whom he was talking, back against the door. Then he turned, back to the police, opened the door and
went inside his apartment.

                                                        -6-
        Conway also reported that Janvier started looking left to right and appeared "nervous,"

not an unreasonable response, if I credit the testimony, for both the innocent and the guilty when

police officers arrive at your doorstep. Conway then "got to the fence and put [his] hands on it"

at which point Janvier took another step closer to the doorway, while keeping his back hidden

from view. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 45:8-9, 12. On cross-examination, Conway acknowledged that

Janvier actually turned fully to go inside, with his back directly in view. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 84:7-10.

Without any more information, Conway said that he "believed the gentleman on the porch had

the firearm," and so he pushed open the gate and ran through. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 46:14-16. In fact,

while Conway may have had a hunch about whether the man on the porch was armed, I find that

he did not have reasonable suspicion as the law required.

        By the time the gate was completely open, Janvier was five to eight feet from Conway.8

Janvier "fled" into the house, according to Conway. Conway chased him -- through the fence, up

the walkway, up the three steps of the porch. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 77:16-19, 25.9 He never yelled

"stop." Significantly, when the officer entered the door to 17 Gleason Street, Janvier was right

there, essentially at the first step. Conway claimed he could reach out to grab the suspect. Hr'g

Day 1 Tr. 101:11-12. And when he did, both fell. Conway reported, "I reached out and touched

the back of his lower back" and felt a gun. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 49:19-20. He yelled to the other

officers, "he's got a gun!" Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 50:7-8.

        After feeling the gun, Conway tried to grab Janvier, who regained his footing and went

towards his apartment. The officer caught him on the landing of Janvier's apartment and tackled


        8
            On redirect, the officer changed this to "five feet." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 94:25.
         9
           Conway acknowledged the distance was more like "8 to 10" feet because of the path that he was obliged
to follow. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 100:12-14.

                                                           -7-
him. The force of the contact burst open the Janvier apartment door; both fell to the ground.

The two other officers, who were following closely behind Conway, arrested Janvier after a

struggle, while Conway secured the gun.

         Several parts of the officer's account are troubling. Given the layout of the house, the

only way for the officer to have caught up with Janvier on the steps going up to his apartment

was if a) Janvier was not fleeing at all -- and therefore not behaving in a way that the officer

found to be suspicious, or b) the officer was totally mistaken about the encounter on the steps.10

If Janvier were not running to evade the officer, he would have remained just inside the doorway

of the small common area of the building. If he were fleeing, he would have surely been in his

apartment before the officer had arrived. The porch was small, his apartment four steps up a

flight of stairs. The officer was at some distance from Janvier when he supposedly took chase.

Janvier need only open the door to the building, and in seconds he would be in his apartment,

long before his pursuer. The account of the struggle on the stairs, in short, is inconsistent with

the physical layout of the building.11

         Janvier's mother, Marie Janvier, testified that she had earlier made arrangements for her

son to have dinner, that he went outside while she put the food on the table, and that she then

dozed off for five or ten minutes while waiting for him. At some point, the door to the apartment

opened, her son said "Mommy" as he fell to the floor. Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 111:11-13. According to

her, the three officers then "hit him and beat him." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 111:20-22.


         10
            Q: [by defense counsel]: "This entire time that you opened the fence, ran up the stairs of the porch onto
the porch, this man has only moved from the doorway to not even getting to the first step; is that your testimony?"
Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 80:22-25; A. "Yes, sir." Hr'g Day 1 Tr. 81:1
         11
            Defendant claims it would not be so easy to feel a firearm through a heavy coat during the brief encounter
on the stairs. I do not have to resolve the issue. I believe the officer had no right to reach out to touch him at all.

                                                          -8-
II.    DISCUSSION

       Even a temporary police detention constitutes a seizure under the Fourth Amendment.

As such, in order to pass constitutional muster that detention must be reasonable by

constitutional standards. Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 19 (1968). A police officer must have a

reasonable, articulable suspicion of an individual's involvement in some criminal activity in

order to make the initial stop. Terry, 392 U.S. at 21. Moreover, actions undertaken pursuant to

that stop must be reasonably related in scope to the stop itself "unless the police have a basis for

expanding their investigation." United States v. Henderson, 463 F.3d 27, 45 (1st Cir. 2006).

There is no question that when Conway touched Janvier on the steps of 17 Gleason Street, it was

a Terry stop.

       Reasonableness has to be judged according to objective criteria, not the individual

officer's subjective perceptions or motives. See Terry, 392 U.S. at 21-22; see also Whren v.

United States, 517 U.S. 806, 813 (1996). And it is a fact-sensitive inquiry, based on the totality

of the surrounding circumstances. See United States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71 (1st Cir. 2004).

       A.       The Anonymous Call

       At the time that the police arrived at 17 Gleason Street, I find that they had no reasonable

suspicion to believe that Janvier, the man on the porch, was the man with the gun mentioned in

the 911 tape. Indeed, the police agreed that none of the individuals at the house -- the two in the

driveway, Janvier on the porch -- totally fit the description. They all "kind of fit it," an

observation so generic as to be less than helpful. Moreover, of the three, Janvier, the lightest in

weight, least matched the 210-pound description in the call. While the government argues that

the caller could have mistaken Janvier's baggy clothes for the torso of a heavier man, the


                                                 -9-
argument is contrived. If reasonable suspicion is to mean anything, it has to mean that a seventy

pound differential is not irrelevant.

       The fact that the call came from an anonymous source suggests that it may be entitled to

less weight, depending on the circumstances. In Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266, 274 (2000), the

Court held that truly anonymous tips must be corroborated in some meaningful way in order to

justify crossing the reasonable suspicion threshold. The rationale was straightforward: Where

the caller intentionally conceals her identity from police in order to prevent them from "h[olding]

her responsible if her allegations turn[ed] out to be fabricated," it undermines the reliability of

the tip. J.L., 529 U.S. at 270.

       The test is obviously contextual. Not every anonymous call should be discounted; not

every call credited. The First Circuit, for example, applying J.L., expanded on what that

corroboration might entail. In United States v. Ruidiaz, 529 F.3d 25, 30-31 (1st. Cir. 2008), the

court held that when determining whether to afford any weight to an anonymous 911 call, the

proper test "does not hinge on the definition of 'anonymous'" but rather, on whether the call

possessed other indicia of reliability, a determination that must be made "in light of all the

circumstances." Significantly in Ruidiaz, the caller confirmed his telephone number and agreed

that the police could call him back. 529 F.3d at 30-31. He made it clear that he was willing to

be accountable for the information he gave.

       Also significant, the anonymous 911 call in Rudiaz did not provide the basis for the

initial stop, but rather was part of the information justifying a subsequent protective search of the

defendant once he had been lawfully stopped, a distinction which the First Circuit took pains to

underscore. Ruidiaz, 529 F.3d at 31. J.L., in contrast, involved an anonymous tip that the police


                                                 -10-
used to justify the first prong of the Terry analysis, whether there was a reasonable suspicion to

justify the initial stop. Ruidiaz, 529 F.3d at 31 n.1 (citing J.L., 529 U.S. at 274).12 The

distinction between the initial stop and a subsequent protective sweep makes sense. The critical

intrusion, the one that most implicates constitutional rights because it can justify further

searches, is the first one -- stopping the defendant. In the former situation, courts should look at

anonymous 911 calls with care.

         In United States v. Andrade, 551 F.3d 103, 110 (1st. Cir. 2008), the Court found that the

tip was sufficiently reliable, because the caller was prepared to be accountable for the

information and the details were corroborated by police observations on the street. The caller

was not only told the call was being recorded, but he confirmed his address, even though he did

not give his name.13 And his address suggested that he was in the very building where the shots

had been fired.


         12
            In Ruidiaz, as a result of the 911 call, which indicated that shots had been fired on a certain street in
Brockton, the police went to the location, found a car meeting the description of the 911 call, with a door open and
the defendant slumped in it. Thinking the defendant was the victim and not the perpetrator, the officers reasonably
reached into the vehicle and touched the defendant's shoulders. The defendant's response suggested that it was the
shooter the officers had encountered. The defendant's reaction, coupled with the information from the call provided
the basis for a protective search of the defendant, which disclosed a loaded handgun. Ruidiaz, 529 F.3d at 27-28.
         13
              As the Andrade court recounted the tip:

                    . . . a 911 caller reported a shooting threat to a New Bedford, Massachusetts
                    police operator. After being told by the operator that he was on a recorded line,
                    the caller reported that "[t]hree guys [are] looking to start with some other guy
                    outside on the street here" and confirmed that he was calling from 37 Madison
                    Street. The caller further stated that each of the three men were wearing a
                    hooded sweatshirt-one white, one gray, and one black. The caller told the
                    operator that one of the three men threatened the man who lived in the third floor
                    of 37 Madison Street, telling him that "I'll come back and shoot you or kill you
                    or whatever." In addition, the caller stated that the three men were "walking
                    south on [what] looks like Pleasant Street." The operator, who had a caller ID
                    display showing the name and address associated with the calling telephone
                    number, took notes of the caller's statements.

551 F. 3d at 106.

                                                          -11-
       Likewise in United States v. Bates, 750 F. Supp. 2d 342, 348 (D. Mass. 2010)

circumstances corroborated the reliability of the anonymous 911 call. The information contained

in the call was extraordinarily detailed. She indicated that her mother had called her, telling her

that her niece would be coming over with the niece's boyfriend, and that her mother believed the

boyfriend had a gun in his backpack. After consulting her mother, the caller described the man

with precision and gave his name. She also provided precise information about his location.

Indeed, she identified where he was, the direction he was traveling, while she was on the phone

with the police. While the operator never asked the caller's name, she told the operator her

location and the basis for her information -- that she was the "aunt of the man's girlfriend."

Bates, 750 F. Supp. 2d at 344.

       There was nothing similar to either Bates or Andrade in the case at bar. There was no

attempt -- during the call -- to confirm the caller's identity, to get her permission to call back.

Unlike the callers in Bates or Andrade, the caller here gave limited to no information about who

she was or her vantage point. While she knew that she was being recorded, she was hardly

cooperative. Indeed, at a critical time -- when the police were seeking further details of the tip --

she expressed annoyance and hung up.

       Bates cannot be used for the proposition that, as a general matter, 911 cell phone tips are

not truly anonymous because cell phone callers should understand that their identity can be

traced. To be sure, the court in Bates noted: "[g]iven current cell phone and caller ID

technology, it is likely, even, that the caller knew that her number from a cell phone could be

traced easily by police." 750 F. Supp. 2d at 348. But the constitutional question should not be

resolved by intoning what the caller should have known. Not every cell phone call transforms


                                                 -12-
the 911 tip into one that should be credited. Whether the circumstances corroborate the

reliability of the call and whether the caller is willing to be accountable for her information are

part of the calculus the Court must use to assess reliability.

       Nor can Bates be taken for the proposition that there is a different standard for the

reliability of 911 calls where "public safety" may be at risk. Again, the court in Bates cited to

the part of Ruidiaz, discussed above, which distinguished between anonymous 911 calls

providing a basis for a protective sweep and those that justified an initial stop; public safety

figures more prominently in the former than the latter. 529 F.3d at 31 n.2. In any case, in J.L.,

the Supreme Court was completely unwilling to put all gun stops into the "public safety"

category. It expressly noted that it was rejecting all attempts to modify the Terry analysis to

create a "firearm exception," under which any tip alleging an illegal gun would justify a stop and

frisk even if the accusation failed standard pre-search reliability testing. J.L, 529 U.S. at 272.

The Court added that it would not speculate about the circumstances under which the danger

alleged in an anonymous tip might be so great – e.g., a report of a person carrying a bomb – as to

justify a search even without a showing of reliability." Id. at 273-74.

       In the case at bar, the anonymous caller did not provide reasonable suspicion to stop

Janvier as of the time that the police arrived at his home. Nor did Janvier's behavior, turning and

taking a few steps to go into his own home, change that analysis.

       B.      The "Flight"

       The government justifies the officers' conduct in following the defendant into his home.

The premise of this is that at the moment the officers arrived, Janvier began behaving

suspiciously, both trying to cover up the gun in his back waistband, turning left and right, and


                                                 -13-
then fleeing into the house. Conway followed Janvier into the home, encountered him on the

stairs when he stumbled, reached out and felt a gun in his waistband. I do not accept the

government's characterization of Janvier's behavior at all.

       I do not credit the officer's account – with respect to Janvier's allegedly evasive behavior

on the porch or even the claim that Janvier "fled" into his own home. Janvier was wearing a

large puffy jacket. This was the jacket that the government claims led to a 70-pound "mistake"

on the part of the anonymous caller. It did not take evasive tactics to cover anything up. In

addition, the officer's testimony was inconsistent about what Janvier was or was not doing. It

changed during the hearing; it differed from what he had said at an earlier hearing and in earlier

reports.

       And the flight that the officer described is inconsistent with the layout of the house at 17

Gleason Street. When Conway arrived at the front of the house he was some distance from

Janvier on the porch. He describes Janvier as immediately "fleeing" the minute Conway opened

the fenced gate. To get to Janvier, Conway had to open the fence, go up the driveway and enter

the front door, a distance of perhaps eight to ten feet because of the path he had to follow. Yet

when Conway got to the door of the house and went in, Janvier was right there.

       The video suggested that it would have only taken a few steps for Janvier to get to his

apartment. For Janvier to be where Conway reported he was suggests either that he was not

fleeing at all, or the officer is wholly mistaken about the encounter on the steps.

       Indeed, there is something particularly troubling about the government's argument.

Retreating into one's home, as a matter of law, even if intended to avoid contact with the police,

cannot per se give rise to suspicion of guilt. See Silverman v. U.S., 365 U.S. 505, 511 (1961)


                                                -14-
("At the very core stands the right of a man to retreat into his own home and there be free from

unreasonable governmental intrusion."); see also Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 124 (2000)

("avoidance of the police, standing alone, does not give rise to a particularized, reasonable

suspicion that a person is committing a crime"); Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 498 (1983)

(plurality opinion) (when an officer, without reasonable suspicion or probable cause, approaches

an individual, the individual has a right to ignore the police and go about his business).

III.   TERRY STOP

       Reaching out to grab a suspect is surely a stop. See United States v. Mendenhall, 446

U.S. 544, 553 (1980); United States v. Smith, 423 F.3d 25, 28 (1st. Cir. 2005); United States v.

Zapata, 18 F.3d 971, 976 (1st. Cir. 1994); United States v. Franklin, 323 F.3d 1298, 1301 (11th

Cir. 2003) (a person can be seized through a show of authority only if he yields to that authority;

if the person flees, he is seized only when he is caught; defendant was only seized when tackled).

In California v. Hodari D., 499 U.S. 621, 628 (1991), the Court held that a reasonable belief that

a person is not free to leave is "a necessary but not sufficient condition for seizure." To be sure,

when a person ism as here, physically touched by the police who are running after him there is

no doubt; it is a seizure. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 625 (internal citation omitted) ("merely

touching, however slightly" sufficient to constitute a Fourth Amendment intrusion) (citing to

Terry, 392 U.S. at 19 n.16) (a seizure occurs "when the officer, by means of physical force or

show of authority, has in some way, restrained the liberty of a citizen").

       If there was insufficient suspicion to justify stopping Janvier at the moment the officers

arrived, if Janvier's behavior in turning and going into his own home was not suspicious, then




                                                -15-
there was neither a basis for pursuit, nor surely, for a Terry stop. The stop was illegal; its fruits

must be suppressed.

IV.    CONCLUSION

       For the foregoing reasons, the Defendant's Motion to Suppress (document #17) is

GRANTED.

SO ORDERED.

Date: July 26, 2011                    BáB atÇvç ZxÜàÇxÜ
                                       NANCY GERTNER, U.S.D.J.




                                                 -16-
