                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

                             CRIMINAL NO. 11-10038-RWZ

                             UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                                             v.

                                   RASHAD GREAVES


                                        ORDER
                                     August 30, 2011
ZOBEL, D.J.

       Defendant, Rashad Greaves, stands indicted under 18 U. S.C.§922(g)(1), for

possessing on September 17, 2010, one Heritage Manufacturing, Inc. Stealth C-4000

semiautomatic handgun and 50 rounds of Winchester S&W 40 caliber ammunition,

after he had been convicted of a felony. He has moved to suppress the gun found at

his residence pursuant to a search warrant which, defendant asserts, was issued

without probable cause. Specifically, he characterizes the affidavit supporting the

application for the warrant as “based largely on months-old vague information from a

single unnamed informant that was too stale to constitute probable cause that the

officers would find evidence of criminal activity in Mr. Greaves’s (sic) home”.

       Gregory J. Forestell, a police officer in the City of Melrose who was serving at

the rank of Detective on September 16, 2010, when he signed the affidavit, does,

indeed, rely on only one confidential unnamed informant, referred to as KM1. However,

he points out that he does know KM1's name, address and telephone number and that

KM1 had provided information previously which led to a search warrant and resultant

seizure of narcotics. With respect to this case, Mr. Forestell states in the affidavit that
he has spoken to KM1 on multiple occasions and that KM1 told him that within the past

few months he had personally been inside defendant’s residence at 44 Waverly Place,

Melrose, and had seen a large caliber stainless steel revolver with green tape around

the handle in defendant’s bedroom on more than one occasion. He also said that

defendant was the sole occupant of that house.

      Detective Forestell further tells about his inquiries into defendant’s criminal

record, which turned out to be extensive and included a number of violent offenses. He

noted that Melrose police had filed a report the preceding day, September 15, 2010,

that officers responded to 44 Waverly Place and the person in the house was

defendant. He also ascertained that defendant did not have a Firearms Identification

Card or license to carry firearms. Finally, he described the building at 44 Waverly

Place in considerable detail.

      Contrary to defendant’s suggestion that the information from KM1 was weeks or

months old and thus stale and unreliable, the affidavit states that KM1 had been at 44

Waverly Place on multiple occasions “within the past few months” and had seen the

described gun in defendant’s bedroom “on more than one occasion.” That he

observed the gun with its unique green tape several times over a period of time

suggests a stability of place that one could reasonably expect to continue.

      I find the affidavit fully adequate to support the magistrate’s conclusion of

probable cause to believe that a stainless steel firearm and ammunition were present at

44 Waverly Street and in the possession of the defendant.

      The motion to suppress is denied.

      August 30, 2011                                     /s/Rya W. Zobel
         DATE                                               RYA W. ZOBEL

                                            2
    UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




3
