                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                       )
                                               )
        v.                                     )    1:10-cr-00147-JAW
                                               )
BRANDON CAPAROTTA                              )

                              PRESENTENCE ORDER

   I.   STATEMENT OF FACTS

        On November 10, 2010, Brandon Caparotta pleaded guilty to theft of firearms

from a licensed dealer, a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(u), and possession of stolen

firearms, a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(a)(2). At the guilty plea, the Court ordered

the preparation of a presentence report (PSR). The Probation Office last revised the

PSR on January 26, 2011 and the parties interposed a number of objections. PSR

at 1, 20-23.     The Government objected to the number of guns for which the

Defendant should be held accountable.         Id. at 20.   Mr. Caparotta made six

objections to the contents of the PSR:

   1) Paragraphs 5 and 7: Corey Damon’s Interview

        Paragraphs 5 and 7 of the PSR sets forth the contents of law

        enforcement interviews of Corey Damon, a co-defendant.            The

        Defendant objected to the inclusion of Mr. Damon’s statements,

        because they were not, in his view, true;

   2) Paragraph 6: Tyler Damon’s Interview

        Paragraph 6 of the PSR contains the contents of a law enforcement

        interview of Tyler Damon, a co-defendant.     The Defendant objected
      because he believes that Tyler Damon did not say where he dropped off

      the guns, but if he did, the PSR should reflect that he dropped them off

      in Winterport, not Bucksport, Maine.

   3) Paragraph 12: Restitution

      Paragraph 12 of the PSR contains information on restitution to the

      victims.   The Defendant objected, saying that because the firearms

      were recovered, there should be no restitution;

   4) Paragraph 17: Defendant’s Drug Use

      Paragraph 17 of the PSR contains information about the Defendant’s

      use of drugs.     The Defendant objected, saying that he had not

      discussed his drug use near the time of the burglary.

   5) Paragraph 19: Stolen Firearm Enhancement

      Paragraph 19 of the PSR imposes a two-level enhancement under

      U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(b)(4). The Defendant objected to the enhancement

      because he contended that specific offense characteristic is accounted

      for in the offense of conviction.

   6) Paragraph 20: Use of a Firearm While Aiding in a Burglary

      Paragraph 20 of the PSR imposes a four level enhancement under

      U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(b)(6). The Defendant objected to the enhancement on

      the ground that he did not use a firearm.

PSR at 21-23.




                                          2
      Counsel filed memoranda in anticipation of sentencing.      Mem. in Aid of

Sentencing (Docket # 34); Def.’s Mem. in Aid of Sentencing (Docket # 35);Gov’t’s

Resp. to Def.’s Mem. in Aid of Sentencing (Docket # 98).        The Court held a

presentence conference on February 23, 2011. The Court scheduled the sentencing

hearing for March 25, 2011.

      At the March 25, 2011 sentencing hearing, after confirming the Defendant’s

competency, the Court directed the Defendant to Part A of the PSR, the offense, to

determine whether he agreed with the PSR’s description of what occurred. Defense

counsel objected to paragraphs 5 and 7 of the PSR. She explained that she was not

objecting because the PSR inaccurately reported what Corey Damon had said;

rather, she was objecting because what Corey Damon had said was false and should

not be considered by the Court.

      Paragraph 5 of the PSR stated:

      Corey Damon was then advised of his Miranda rights and was
      interviewed. Corey Damon admitted to breaking into MCRG and
      stealing guns, but refused to state where the stolen guns were. He also
      admitted to stealing the truck. Later that day, Corey Damon was
      interviewed by MSP and ATF investigators. He reported that, after
      stealing the pickup truck, he met friends and they followed him out to
      MCRG. Damon was familiar with MCRG because he had been there
      years ago with his grandfather and figured it would be an easy location
      to rob. Corey Damon reported that he broke into the store while the
      others waited outside and stole 16 guns, which he put into the back of
      the stolen pickup. He then took the guns to a location and dropped
      them off, before going to pick up his cousin. The two then got the
      stolen truck stuck in a ditch. Corey Damon reported that the mini-
      bike they had in the back of the truck, he had found in the woods. He
      further reported that he was extremely intoxicated the night before
      and had taken 150 10mg Valium pills, prior to stealing the truck.
      Corey Damon refused to state where he had taken the guns and
      demanded a “deal” on the charges before he would turn them over,



                                        3
      saying that they were in a safe place but if he did not get a deal, he
      would sell them when he got out on bail. He further reported that he
      had stolen numerous firearms prior to this incident, estimating the
      value of his thefts at $20,000.

PSR ¶ 5. Paragraph 7 reads:

      On August 24, 2010, agents again interviewed Corey Damon. This
      time, Damon stated that he had been with Tyler Damon, Caparotta,
      and Caparotta’s girlfriend, Shelby Pinkham, when he stole the truck.
      The group then discussed breaking into MCRG and drove out to
      Orrington, ME. According to Corey Damon, Caparotta was supposed
      to break into the store with him but backed out and acted as the look-
      out. Caparotta brought a loaded Mini-14 rifle, that Corey Damon had
      stolen during a burglary of a residence in Millinocket, ME, the week
      prior. Originally, Damon reported that he broke into MCRG alone and
      had the Mini-14 rifle with him. However, he later stated that
      Caparotta had the Mini-14 with him at the side of the house. Both
      Tyler Damon and Pinkham remained in the car. Once in the business,
      Corey Damon heard a dog bark and he grabbed as many guns as he
      could, before running out of the store and putting the guns in the back
      of the pickup truck. As Corey passed Caparotta on the way back to the
      truck, he observed Caparotta eject a round from the Mini-14. They all
      left the premises and brought the guns to Caparotta’s residence. While
      at the residence, Caparotta gave Cory Damon the mini-bike, which
      Caparotta reported stealing, and asked Damon to sell it for him, so
      they could split the money. They were in the process of stealing a
      Ninja 1000 motorcycle when the pickup truck got stuck in a ditch and
      the police came. Corey Damon further admitted that he had broken
      into residences owned by a man identified as “Gig” in Millinocket, ME.
      During those burglaries which he committed with two other
      individuals, Damon stole approximately twenty guns, most of which he
      brought to Caparotta’s residence. Three of the guns were stored at a
      residence in Millinocket, ME and a few others he reported he sold to
      individuals he would not identify. Later that day, agents met with
      Chuck Dickenson, the father of Corey Damon’s girlfriend, who
      provided them with the three firearms. Dickenson reported that he
      found the firearms in Dickenson’s grandparent’s home in Millinocket,
      where Damon had stayed on occasion. Dickinson also identified “Gig”
      as being his grandfather, Clem D’Angelo.

PSR at ¶ 7. Defense counsel contended that under Rule 32(i)(3)(B), the Court had

an obligation to strike the portion of the PSR to which she had objected. FED. R.



                                        4
CRIM. P. 32(i)(3)(B). The Court continued the hearing to allow the parties, especially

the Government, to adequately prepare for the hearing.

   II. DISCUSSION

   Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 32 provides:

      At sentencing, the court . . . must - - for any disputed portion of the
      [PSR] or other controverted matter - - rule on the dispute or determine
      that a ruling is unnecessary either because the matter will not affect
      sentencing, or because the court will not consider the matter in
      sentencing.

FED. R. CRIM. P. 32(i)(3)(B). In United States v. Jimenez-Rivera, 842 F.2d 545, 550

(1st Cir. 1988), the First Circuit explained that Rule 32 “was promulgated, in part,

to assure that the defendant is not prejudiced in the future by any factual errors in

the [PSR].” The First Circuit mentioned that the Bureau of Prisons relies upon the

accuracy of the PSR “in making critical determinations relating to custody . . . .” Id.

at 550- 51.

      In reviewing paragraphs five and seven of the PSR, it is apparent that not all

of Mr. Damon’s statements have been consistent and yet at the same time, not all

have been inconsistent. In fairness to the Government, it is unclear exactly what

portions of paragraphs five and seven Mr. Caparotta believes are erroneous and

what portions he accepts as correct.

      The Court therefore ORDERS Brandon Caparotta within seven days of the

date of this Order to set forth in detail precisely what statements he contends are

erroneous on a line by line basis. Within seven days of receipt of the Defendant’s

proffer, the Court ORDERS the Government to inform the Court what, if any,




                                          5
evidence it intends to put forward in response to the Defendant’s objections. The

Court will then reschedule the sentencing hearing for a two-hour period unless

informed that a longer or shorter period is necessary.

      SO ORDERED.



                                 /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                 JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                 CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 28th day of March, 2011




                                          6
