                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                    DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS



                                         )
NELSON CARRASQUILLO,                     )
                       Petitioner,       )
                                         )   CRIMINAL ACTION
                                         )   NO. 06-10284-WGY
          v.                             )
                                         )
UNITED STATES,                           )
                       Respondent.       )
                                         )


                                REPORT

YOUNG, D.J.                                        October 13, 2011

     By order of September 26, 2011, the United States Court of

Appeals for the First Circuit ordered a limited remand of the

appeal of Nelson Carrasquillo (“Carrasquillo”)

     to allow the district court to clarify the reasoning
     behind its sua sponte dismissal, as we are not able to
     discern the reasons for the dismissal. In particular, we
     are unable to determine what the court meant when it
     concluded that Carrasquillo had failed to show prejudice.

Order of Court, Carrasquillo v. United States, No. 10-1489 (1st

Cir. Sept. 26, 2011).

     In his memorandum in support of his habeas petition,

Carrasquillo complains that his counsel was constitutionally

ineffective when, during an unprotected proffer after his plea,

his counsel failed to protect him from egregious and improper

browbeating by the government which badgered him into an untrue

admission of gun possession in the course of committing the

                                     1
crimes to which he had just pleaded guilty.      Pet’r’s Mem. Supp.

Mot. Pursuant 28 U.S.C. § 2255 (“Pet’r’s Mem.”) 10-11, ECF No.

235.       Carrasquillo also complains that the pre-sentence report

misrepresents the extent of his drinking during the relevant time

period.      Id. at 12.   This Court summarily dismissed his petition

with the margin notation: “Even accepting as true the facts

alleged, petitioner has not demonstrated any prejudice . . . .”

Order, Mar. 31, 2010.

       The direct answer to the query from the Court of Appeals is

that Carrasquillo suffered no constitutional prejudice from the

conduct of defense counsel because neither his gun possession vel

non nor his drinking (there is no suggestion here of diminished

responsibility) played any role whatsoever in the sentence this

Court imposed.1      While this Court gave due regard to each of the

18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) factors and fashioned just and individualized

sentences for Carrasquillo and each of his co-defendants, the

main driver of Carrasquillo’s sentence was the need for due

proportionality among Carlos A. Pizarro (least culpable - already

sentenced to thirteen years), see Judgment in a Criminal Case at


       1
      This Court’s report that Carrasquillo’s gun possession
played no role in determining his ultimate sentence ought not be
taken as an assertion that the question of his gun possession was
not considered. As the record makes clear, the matter was
carefully considered in determining whether to enhance the
potential sentence and, conversely, whether to grant a safety
valve adjustment. See Sentencing Tr. 21-24, Mar. 17, 2008, ECF
No. 171.


                                     2
2, United States v. Pizarro, No. 06-10284-2 (D. Mass. Dec. 13,

2007), ECF No. 156; Carrasquillo (more culpable - sentenced to

eighteen years), see J. Criminal Case 2, ECF No. 166; and Roberto

E. Pulido (most culpable - later sentenced to twenty-six years),

see Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case at 2, United States v.

Pulido, No. 06-10284-1 (D. Mass. July 24, 2008), ECF No. 197.

The need for proportionality among co-defendants has been

expressly recognized as an appropriate consideration by the First

Circuit, see United States v. Martin, 520 F.3d 87, 94 (1st Cir.

2008), and that was what was going on here.     Indeed, this was the

focus of the argument of both counsel during the sentencing

hearing, see Sentencing Tr. 32-37, 41-43, Mar. 17, 2008, ECF No.

171, and this Court expressly concluded that “[Carrasquillo’s]

involvement is much greater than that of Mr. Pizarro.”    Id. at

44.   There simply was no prejudice.   That’s it.

      Even so, as the Court of Appeals has here thought it

necessary to inquire as to this Court’s approach, an appropriate

respect for the question posed requires a more nuanced response.

           I.   Possible Sentence Enhancement

      In United States v. Kandirakis, 441 F. Supp. 2d 282, 318-20

(D. Mass. 2006), this Court sought to reconcile the conflicting

opinions in United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), by

adopting a protocol whereby all factual sentencing enhancements

(other than criminal history matters wherein a defendant has


                                 3
already had his opportunity for jury fact finding) must be tried

to a jury on actual evidence requiring proof beyond a reasonable

doubt.   This procedure has garnered the express approval of

Justices Scalia and Thomas, Rita v. United States, 551 U.S. 338,

378 n.5 (2007) (Scalia and Thomas, JJ., concurring in part and

concurring in the judgment), and, while not required in the First

Circuit, United States v. Zapata, 589 F.3d 475, 482-84 (1st Cir.

2009), my use of it to sentence on a firmly-established factual

footing has thus far never been questioned at the appellate

level.   This Court applies the protocol to a plea by requiring

that, during the plea colloquy, the defendant knowingly,

intelligently, and voluntarily admit to the facts that undergird

the enhancement.2


     2
      The wisdom of this protocol is confirmed on a daily basis
in this session of the Court. Consider these two recent cases:
     In United States v. Gonsalves, No. 10-10398 (D. Mass. 2011),
Gonsalves had pleaded guilty, freely admitting the quantity of
drugs in the controlled buy as well as drugs in other uncharged
buys. Plea Colloquy, Gonsalves, No. 10-10398 (May 10, 2011). He
adamantly denied, however, that he had anything to do with other
drugs found in the car where he was arrested. Id. Accordingly,
the Court accepted his plea and, Gonsalves having waived his
right to a jury on this issue, scheduled an evidentiary hearing
to precede his sentencing on the issue of whether reasonably to
attribute the other drugs in the car to him. See Docket Entry,
Gonsalves, No. 10-10398 (May 10, 2011). Faced with the prospect
of actually having to prove the provenance of these drugs, the
government undertook a further investigation which revealed that,
in fact, Gonsalves had nothing to do with the drugs in the car.
See, e.g., Sentencing Excerpt Transcript at 3, Gonsalves, No. 10-
10398, ECF. No. 23-1 (Sept. 30, 2011). The pre-sentence report
had assigned a level 26 for the drugs attributable to Gonsalves.
Given the government’s further investigation, this level fell to
18 and Gonsalves was sentenced accordingly. See Pre-Sentence

                                 4
     Here, no mention was made of gun possession during

Carrasquillo’s plea colloquy, see Plea Colloquy, Nov. 05, 2007,

ECF No. 170, and he made no admission as to any such possession.

The pre-sentence report, however, recommended a two-level

increase based on such an admission during the post-plea

unprotected proffer.   Pre-Sentence Report 12, Feb. 28, 2008.

Government counsel argued that such a recent admission ought be

considered in determining Carrasquillo’s sentence.   Sentencing

Tr. 12.

     This Court sorted these matters out during the sentencing

hearing.   Id. at 14-16, 21-24.   As a starting point, one can do

no better than refer to Judge Hornby’s succinct and sensible

explanation of the workings of a federal sentencing hearing



Report at 9, Gonsalves, No. 10-10398 (July 12, 2011).
     In United States v. Rago, No. 08-10268, Rago was convicted
of criminal violations of the Taft-Hartley laws in that, inter
alia, he demanded or received unlawful labor payments. See
Judgment in a Criminal Case at 1, Rago, No. 08-10268, ECF No.
167. The amount of such payments was committed to the jury,
which found Rago guilty of demanding or receiving $21,485.00 of
such payments. See Pre-Sentence Report at 5, Rago, No. 08-10268
(Sept. 26, 2011). Nevertheless, the government persuaded the
probation officer to put the figure $230,900 in the pre-sentence
report. Id. at 8. This resulted in a 12-level enhancement. Id.
At sentencing, the Court concluded that the jury figure was
correct. This resulted in a 4-level enhancement and Rago was
sentenced accordingly. See, e.g., Sentencing Excerpt Transcript,
Rago, No. 08-10268, ECF No. 167-1 (Oct. 3, 2011). The forfeiture
mandatory under the law dropped from $230,900 to $10,000. Id. at
5.
     Absent a consistent commitment to actual fact-finding, this
Court simply does not have adequate confidence that its crucial
sentencing decisions are truly based in existential reality.

                                  5
today.   D. Brock Hornby, Speaking in Sentences, 14 Green Bag 2d

147 (2011).   I seek to emulate Judge Hornby’s wise advice with

but few changes, primarily in the order of analysis.

     As I explained at the outset of Carrasquillo’s sentencing

hearing:

          THE COURT: Now, this [] sentencing proceeds under 18
     United States Code, Section 3553(a). The first thing –-
     the first thing in this Court, I consider, I proceed in
     the following fashion.        I determine the highest
     constitutionally reasonable sentence. I determine the
     highest constitutionally reasonable sentence by taking
     all the factors in the sentencing guidelines which have
     been admitted to, or in terms of the criminal history
     which I can take judicial notice of, without any downward
     adjustment of any sort, and then I go to the highest of
     the resultant range. In this Court’s view that is the
     highest constitutionally reasonable sentence because I
     would be attributing to Mr. Carrasquillo things that I
     would not, that I don’t think can be quantified.
          Now, once I’ve done that then I will turn to the,
     from the available sentencing databases the average
     sentences imposed for crimes of this type on other
     offenders nationwide, First Circuit, and in this
     district. When that’s done, I’ll go back and calculate,
     as I am required to, the advisory sentencing guidelines,
     and there I will take into account some, and I understand
     it’s disputed, downward adjustments. And again, if you
     dispute the ones that I make or think I should make
     others, I will hear you.
          When that’s all decided, then I’ll hear the
     government with respect to its sentencing recommendation,
     the defense, I’ll hear from Mr. Carrasquillo, and impose
     sentence.

Sentencing Tr. at 8-9.   This is the Court’s usual procedure.    See

United States v. Jones, 762 F. Supp. 2d 270, 279-81 (D. Mass.

2010).

     The dispute over the gun possession enhancement arose at

once and the Court inquired:

                                 6
          THE COURT: But as a factual matter there’s no
     dispute, is it, he admitted to the gun, in an unprotected
     safety valve proffer. Is that fact disputed?
          [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Not for the purpose of this
     hearing, no.

Sentencing Tr. at 15.

     The Court also reflected:

          [THE COURT]: Courts have never yet taken the
     position, once Booker came down, with remedial Booker,
     that enhancements had to be charged. I think it’s a good
     policy. I think that would be a good direction for the
     law to take.   But I operate within a legal system to
     which I am sworn to adhere.        And I take it very
     seriously. There is no requirement that it be charged
     and go through the indictment process. At least there’s
     no requirement yet. So, I’m choosing my words with care.
     I’m trying to find the highest constitutionally
     reasonable sentence that a judge could impose.
          Now, I have little trouble with his admission
     because the admission was made during an unprotected
     proffer. Since the admission’s there, I do count it now.
     Whether I count it for the advisory sentencing
     calculation is another thing altogether.

Id. at 14.

     Having established the highest constitutionally reasonable

sentence that might be imposed on Carrasquillo (293 months), id.

at 10, the Court revisited the gun possession issue during the

course of calculating the advisory sentencing guidelines and

entertained further argument.    Defense counsel was hardly supine

at this (or any) stage.   The relevant interchange was:

          THE   COURT:   For   purposes   of   the   guideline
     calculation, I think I will not add in the two levels for
     the gun. At the same time, I see no basis for applying
     the safety valve in circumstances where by its own terms
     it does not apply. So it’s a wash. If someone wants to
     argue about that I will hear you.


                                  7
Id. at 21.

          THE COURT: If I counted the gun and went up two
     levels and then gave him the safety valve and went down
     two levels, the result is the same.

Id. at 22.

           THE COURT: Why should there be a gun -- why should
     I not count the gun as an enhancement if it was made
     during an unprotected proffer, but count the gun --
     strike that. It seems to me either I count it both ways
     or I don’t count it both ways.
           What’s wrong with that?
           [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, under the circumstances of
     this proffer -- first of all, it took a little time to
     extract that information from Mr. Carrasquillo. I’m not
     saying that there was anything that was improper or
     illicit done during the course of the proffer, but
     initially I think Mr. Carrasquillo’s response was that he
     didn’t believe that he carried a gun. . . .
           But nevertheless, after the question had gone around
     several times, Mr. Carrasquillo did concede to possessing
     a gun. But in the context of his proffer it was more of
     a reflexive thing in the sense of him being a police
     officer, it’s something that he took with him on most
     occasions to most events and just happened to have it in
     his possession on this occasion without having it for the
     purpose I think that, that underlies a court not
     accepting the safety valve proffer.
           THE COURT: All right, I understand. But I’m . . .
     going to treat it as a wash. I’m not going to add it and
     I’m not going to give the safety valve.
           That gives us an adjusted offense level of 36, a
     criminal history category of I, which gives as the
     advice from the Sentencing Commission that the sentence
     in this case not be less than 188 months nor more than
     235 months; the period of supervised release is
     recommended to be five years; a fine of not less than
     [$20,000] nor more than $12 million.
     . . .
     Arithmetically, are the guidelines properly calculated,
     [counsel]?
           [AUSA]: They are from the government’s perspective,
     yes.
           THE COURT: Arithmetically, and saving your rights,
     [defense counsel], are they properly calculated?
           [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, yes with one exception [not

                                 8
     relevant here].

Id. at 23-24.

         In sum, this Court did not add in a two-level enhancement

for gun possession by Carrasquillo.     He can hardly complain

about that, and I do not understand him to be complaining.       In

actuality though, stripped of colorful adjectives and slanted

conclusions, Carrasquillo’s habeas memorandum, see Pet’r’s Mem.,

was actually argued to this Court by defense counsel at

sentencing.     Knowing both counsel as I do, such argument

resonated with the Court and won the day for Carrasquillo on

this point.3


     3
       It cannot be repeated too often that the Court’s
conclusion here, as well as its conclusion not to award the
safety valve discount, is not a “finding,” much less does it
reflect a calculus of “fair preponderance” or “beyond a
reasonable doubt.” Contra U.S.S.G. § 6A1.3, Commentary. These
are concepts that depend on genuine evidence. A sentencing
hearing is simply not an evidentiary hearing. It is sophistry to
pretend otherwise. See Jones, 762 F. Supp. 2d at 282 n.11;
United States v. Tejeda, 550 F. Supp. 2d 204, 207 (D. Mass.
2008); United States v. Birkett, 501 F. Supp. 2d 269, 272 (D.
Mass. 2007); United States v. Griffin, 494 F. Supp. 2d 1, 13 (D.
Mass. 2007), vacated on other grounds, 524 F.3d 71 (1st Cir.
2008); United States v. Green, 346 F. Supp. 2d 259, 318 (D. Mass.
2004), vacated in part on other grounds, United States v.
Yeje-Cabrera, 430 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2005).
     This is the most perniciously enduring effect of what we now
know was, in its oxymoronic mandatory guise, an unconstitutional
sentencing system. The farther the judicial system drifts from
actual trial of disputed issues before it, the more likely it is
that reality will be subordinated to institutional self interest.
See DeLaventura v. Columbia Acorn Trust, 417 F. Supp. 2d 147,
153-55 n.7 (D. Mass. 2006) (criticizing overemphasis on
settlement in MDL practice). An entire generation of federal
district judges has today been brought up under a sentencing
system that makes crucial determinations about liberty upon a

                                   9
II.   The Safety Valve

      As near as I can figure it out, Carrasquillo is arguing

that had defense counsel been effective, he could have made a

straightforward and honest proffer (with no mention of gun

possession), and thus garnered a two-level safety valve

reduction.   Although it is unclear to me what defense counsel

ought have done, there was no prejudice here.

      Wholly aside from the legal issue whether the safety valve

even applies by its own terms, Carrasquillo’s sentence would be

the same.    Had the Court granted the two-level downward safety

valve adjustment, Carrasquillo’s guideline sentencing range

would have been 151 to 188 months.    See Sentencing Table, United

States Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 5.A (2007).   As noted


mish-mash of non-evidentiary materials that parade under
evidentiary terms which ought be reserved for actual trials. A
strong argument can be made that our current unease with the
overuse of summary judgment in the district courts, see Arthur R.
Miller, The Pretrial Rush to Judgment: Are the “Litigation
Explosion,” “Liability Crisis,” and Efficiency Cliches Eroding
Our Day in Court and Jury Trial Commitments?, 78 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
982 (2003); Diane P. Wood, Summary Judgment and the Law of
Unintended Consequences, 36 Okla. City U. L. Rev. 231 (2011); see
also United States v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 781 F. Supp.
2d 1 (D. Mass. 2011); but see Randall R. Rader, C.J., Fed. Cir.,
Remarks at the Eastern District of Texas Judicial Conference: The
State of Patent Litigation 12-13 (Sept. 27, 2011) (advocating
“aggressive” use of summary judgment in patent cases and seeming
to be fearful of prompt jury trials), available at
https://www.docketnavigator.com/entry/img/The-State-of-Patent-
Litigation-w-Ediscovery-Model-Order.pdf, stems directly from a
sentencing system that strongly encourages, if it does not
actually require, district judges to sentence offenders on second
or third order hearsay and the arguments of counsel. How did we
come to settle for this?

                                10
above, however, this Court counted the gun possession toward the

constitutionally permissible maximum sentence of 293 months.

See Sentencing Tr. 10.       In light of the need for proportionality

discussed above, and the fact that the guidelines are only

advisory, the statutory command that the sentence “reflect the

seriousness of the offense, . . . promote respect for the law,

and . . . provide just punishment for the offense,” 18 U.S.C. §

3553(a)(2)(A), would have led this Court to depart upwards and

impose the same eighteen year (216 months) sentence.

           Moreover, whatever Carrasquillo may think of his proffer,

it is clear that the AUSA was not convinced of its truthfulness

and would not have supported a safety valve reduction regardless

of the persuasive and effective advocacy of defense counsel.

This Court is well aware of its power (and responsibility) to

apply a safety valve reduction even over the objection of the

government.       The simple fact is, however, that I have never done

it.4       Again, my reasoning is straightforward.   The whole idea of



       4
       I make this statement with a high degree of confidence
because

       Donald Womack, the superb court reporter assigned to this
       session, maintains a fully searchable, publicly available
       database of all this Court’s post-Booker sentences and
       the statement of reasons therefor. This database has the
       great advantage of isolating each individual sentence and
       informing this Court’s discretion (and I check it before
       each sentencing hearing).

Jones, 762 F. Supp. 2d at 280.       I’ve checked it here.

                                    11
the safety valve is that there be a “truthful” proffer.

“Truthiness” won’t do.   Absent a full fact-finding hearing on

the matter, this Court is not in a position to second guess

government counsel who most frequently are deep into an

investigation that involves far more than the charges before the

Court.   While I can conceive of a situation where the Court

might grant a safety valve reduction over the objection of the

government, this case does not present that situation, and I

simply cannot conceive of what competent defense counsel might

have done on this record to change either the government’s (or

this Court’s) position on the matter.   Carrasquillo suffered no

prejudice at the hands of his defense counsel here.

     This Court treats every habeas petition with utmost

seriousness in light of the liberty interests involved.    “Sua

sponte dismissed with a margin notation” is reserved for

petitions that are frivolous either legally or in light of the

factual record known to the Court.   Carrasquillo’s petition is

frivolous.



                               Respectfully submitted,

                                /s/ William G. Young
                               WILLIAM G. YOUNG
                               DISTRICT JUDGE




                               12
