                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

                                  )
Donald Gianquitto,                )
               Petitioner,        )
                                  )   Civil Action No. 10-10573-PBS
           v.                     )   Criminal No. 07-10340-PBS
                                  )
United States of America,         )
               Respondent.        )
                                  )

                         MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

                           November 3, 2011
Saris, U.S.D.J.

                            I. Introduction

     Pro se petitioner Donald Gianquitto, who pleaded guilty to

being a felon in possession of ammunition, brings a motion

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255 on grounds that he received

ineffective assistance of counsel.1    Gianquitto claims that his

counsel told him that the former assistant United States Attorney

("AUSA") on his case “was not going to push for jail time,” and

argues that his counsel was ineffective for failing to inform the

Court of the AUSA’s statements.     Defense counsel denied he made

this promise.     Gianquitto requests an evidentiary hearing.

Gianquitto’s claim for ineffective assistance of counsel, as well

as his request for an evidentiary hearing, is DENIED.




1
 This Court denied Gianquitto’s two other ineffective assistance
of counsel claims in its Order of May 11, 2011. (See Docket No.
51)
                            II. Background

     On September 11, 2007, the Melrose Police Department was

contacted by a private alarm company at about 1:00 p.m. regarding

an unauthorized entry into 36 Swains Pond Avenue, the residence

of Gianquitto and his wife.     During a search to determine whether

a burglar was still present, the police found weapons.     After the

police obtained a warrant, agents seized two handguns, three

shotguns, nine rifles, and twenty-one AR-15 style rifle receivers

from two locked safes.     They found 100,000 rounds of ammunition.

At the time of the seizure, Gianquitto was a convicted felon,

having been convicted of conspiracy to distribute cocaine and

possession of cocaine.     On April 7, 2008, Gianquitto pleaded

guilty to being a felon in possession of ammunition in violation

of 18 U.S.C. §922(g).

     At the Rule 11 hearing:

     THE COURT: Has anyone put you under pressure to get you
     to plead guilty?

     THE DEFENDANT: No.
     . . .

     THE COURT: Has anyone promised you anything?

     THE DEFENDANT: No.
     . . .

     THE COURT: Do you understand you’re pleading guilty
     without the benefit of a written plea agreement with
     the government?

     THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

     THE COURT: Do you understand that I’m making no

                                   2
     promises about what my sentence will be?

     THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

R. 11 Hearing 6:4-22.

     On July 14, 2008, after an evidentiary hearing, the Court

sentenced Gianquitto to 41 months of imprisonment, 24 months of

supervised release, a $30,000 fine and a mandatory special

assessment of $100.   The guideline range was 41 to 51 months of

imprisonment.    On July 21, 2009, the First Circuit affirmed

Gianquitto’s sentence.

     Gianquitto claims that his decision to plead guilty was

induced by certain promises made by his Attorney Thomas J.

Butters as well as former Assistant United States Attorney

Timothy Q. Feeley, the original AUSA on the case, now a state

court judge.    In his original affidavit, Gianquitto stated that

Butters told him that “AUSA Feeley was not going to push for jail

time,” and “Butters believed that AUSA Feeley would make these

circumstances and facts clear to the Court at sentencing.”

Feeley was not present at sentencing, and was replaced by AUSA

Kenneth Shine.   In a subsequent declaration, Gianquitto adds that

“Butters ensured my wife and myself a number of times . . . that

there would be no jail time involved, [and] this strongly

influenced my guilty plea.”   Gianquitto contends that Butters was

ineffective for failing to inform the Court of Feeley’s

statements.



                                  3
       In his affidavit, Butters stated that he told Gianquitto

before his plea that “[i]t was [his] opinion . . . that Mr.

Feeley was not going to push hard for a Guideline sentence,” and

later told him after the plea “that Mr. Shine did not share Mr.

Feeley’s attitude toward the case.”     Butters adds, “I did not

inform the Court of my opinion of Mr. Feeley’s attitude since I

did not believe that Mr. Gianquitto pled guilty based on any

assertion by me regarding Mr. Feeley’s sentencing position.”

                           III.   Discussion

       The two-part test of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668

(1984), “applies to challenges to guilty pleas based on

ineffective assistance of counsel.”     Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S.

52, 57 (1985).     First, “defendant must show that counsel’s

representation fell below an objective standard of

reasonableness” under the circumstances.       Strickland, 466 U.S. at

688.     Second, to demonstrate prejudice in the context of a guilty

plea, petitioner “must show that there is a reasonable

probability that, but for counsel's errors, he would not have

pleaded guilty and would have insisted on going to trial.”      Hill,

474 U.S. at 57.

       “Generally the imposition of a sentence greater than that

expected by a defendant, or predicted by his counsel is not

adequate grounds for vacating the sentence under 28 U.S.C. §

2255.”    Calabrese v. United States, 507 F.2d 259, 260 (1st Cir.


                                   4
1974).   “Even if the prediction had been inaccurate, an

inaccurate prediction about sentencing will generally not alone

be sufficient to sustain a claim of ineffective assistance of

counsel.”   Knight v. United States, 37 F.3d 769, 775 (1st Cir.

1995).

     Gianquitto argues that he is entitled to an evidentiary

hearing to counter Butters’ affidavit because Butters actually

promised him that he would not serve jail time.   “A district

court may forego [an evidentiary] hearing when the movant’s

allegations . . . need not be accepted as true because they state

conclusions instead of facts, contradict the record, or are

inherently incredible.”   Owens v. United States, 483 F.3d 48, 57

(1st Cir. 2007) (internal citations and quotations omitted).

     During the plea colloquy, Gianquitto denied under oath that

anyone made any assurances regarding his sentence.   Because both

Feeley and Butters are experienced practitioners, it is unlikely

that Feeley had promised that he would make a recommendation of

no jail time, particularly in the absence of a plea agreement.

It is highly unlikely that neither lawyer disclosed a promise if

it had been made.   Because the allegations of a promise are

inherently incredible and contradict the record, petitioner is

not entitled to an evidentiary hearing.   See United States v.

Pulido, 566 F.3d 52, 58 (1st Cir. 2009) (holding that criminal

defendant was not entitled to an evidentiary hearing because his



                                 5
allegations that his attorney and the government promised him a

particular sentence were contradicted by his representations at

the plea colloquy).   In any event, defendant was put on notice

that I was not making any promises, and it is highly unlikely

that I would have varied downward to probation in the

circumstances of this case even with a government recommendation.

Therefore, even if there had been a false prediction and/or

broken promise, there was no prejudice.

                               ORDER

     The motion (Docket No. 40.) is DENIED.




                                /s/ PATTI B. SARIS
                               PATTI B. SARIS
                               United States District Judge




                                 6
