                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                         DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,          )
                                   )
                  v.               )
                                   )       CRIMINAL   NO.   04-30034-PBS
MICHAEL ALAN CROOKER               )
               Defendant.          )


                           MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
                             November 30, 2011
SARIS, U.S.D.J.
                             I.   Introduction

     On June 18, 2010, the United States Court of Appeals for the

First Circuit (“First Circuit”) reversed defendant Michael Alan

Crooker’s (“Crooker”) criminal conviction for Transportation of a

Firearm in Interstate Commerce by a Convicted Felon in violation

of 18 U.S.C. §§ 921 and 922(c), based on its holding that the

silencer at issue did not qualify as a “firearm” within the

meaning of the statutory definition of 18 U.S.C. §§ 921(a)(3)(c)

and 924.   The First Circuit remanded the case to the District

Court for the entry of a Judgment of Acquittal.             See United

States v. Crooker, 608 F.3d 94 (1st Cir. 2010).1

     Thereafter, the case was reassigned from Judge Ponsor to the

undersigned.   Crooker, now a prisoner serving a federal sentence

at FCI Ray Brook, filed a number of pro se motions.



Mandate issued on August 12, 2010 (Docket No. 263).
1




                                       1
     Specifically, on October 11, 2011, Crooker filed a Renewed

Motion for Return of Property (Docket No. 272).   Six days later,

he filed an Amended and Renewed Motion for Return of Property

(Docket No. 273), and on October 27, 2011, he filed a Motion for

a Court Order to Remove the Judicial Threat Notification (Docket

No. 275).

     On October 25, 2011, the Government filed an Opposition to

the motions for return of property (Docket No. 275).   On November

10, 2011, the Government filed an Opposition to the motion to

remove the judicial threat notification (Docket No. 276).

Thereafter, Crooker filed a Motion for Leave to File a Reply

Memorandum, with an incorporated Reply (Docket No. 278).

     With respect to his motions for return of property, Crooker

argues that, pursuant to Rule 41(g) of the Federal Rules of

Criminal Procedure, he is entitled to the return of all seized

property except for hazardous materials, as to which he renounces

claims to that property.   The property he seeks to be returned is

identified in 38 paragraph of his Amended and Renewed Motion for

Return of Property.   These items include, inter alia: (1) a

silencer and all other accessories;(2) scientific glassware and

non-hazardous chemicals (e.g., aluminum, red phospherus,

potassium permanganate, raney nickel alloy, zinc, potassium

nitrate, copper sulfate, potassium chlorate, potassium

                                 2
pherchlorate, magnesium, sulfur, dextrin, black powder (Goex)),

(3) equipment (e.g., musket caps, containers once containing

ammunition, postage scale, clamps, Bunsen burner, funnel,

ringstand, paper cutter, docuseal machine, flares, glue gun,

plastic pieces, etc.); (4) a Compaq laptop computer, case, cords,

and accessories; (5) notebooks, magazines, utility bills, mailing

labels, address book, and other papers; (6) a Sony HandyCam with

case, manual, and accessories; (7) videotapes, CD’s and DVD’s;

(8) a cellphone; (9) nailgun blanks; (10) electric wires; and

(11) metal rods.2

     Crooker contends that he is filing these motions pro se

because he lacks confidence in his court-appointed counsel and

now wishes to proceed pro se.   Further, he contends that because

this case has concluded with his acquittal, he no longer has

counsel in this case, even though he has court-appointed counsel

in the criminal case before Judge Woodlock.   See United States v.

Crooker, CR 07-30038-DPW.   Crooker further contends that he is

entitled to the return of this property because it was seized

unlawfully, and because this criminal case has concluded.

     The Government opposes Crooker’s motions on several grounds.

First, the Government contends Crooker may not file these motions



Crooker claims these items were seized June 23, 2004 and July
2

15, 2004.

                                 3
pro se because he is represented by counsel in both this case and

the case before Judge Woodlock.   Next, the Government contends

that, although the case before Judge Woodlock has concluded,3 the

case before Judge Woodlock requires the Government to retain the

seized evidence or enter into an agreement with defense counsel

that will permit the Government to return physical items to the

defendant but still retain the ability to use photographs,

stipulations or other means to introduce evidence concerning the

returned items in a future proceeding.   The negotiation between

the United States Attorney’s Office and defense counsel, Attorney

Watkins, is ongoing.   The Government contends that Crooker’s pro

se motion acts at cross purposes with his counsel in the case

before Judge Woodlock.   The Government asserts that if the matter

cannot be resolved, the issue should be raised before Judge

Woodlock as to how to resolve disposition of Crooker’s property.

     Finally, the Government contends that Crooker is not

entitled to the return of his property because it was not

unlawfully seized, and because Crooker cannot show an imminent

need for the property since he cannot possess these items in




Crooker pled guilty on March 28, 2011 and was sentenced to 180
3

months incarceration. See Amended Judgment entered June 24, 2011
(Docket No. 106).

                                  4
prison.    Crooker counters that although he cannot physically

possess this property (which includes downloaded music, family

photographs, and other personal items), he nevertheless has the

right to those items and may give them to friends or relatives

or, alternatively, he may choose to sell those items.

     Next, with respect to the Motion for an Order to Remove

Judicial Threat Notification (Docket No. 275), Crooker seeks an

Order that the Judicial Threat Notification/Detainer be removed

from his Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) file.   First, Crooker contends

that the letter he wrote to Judge Ponsor disparaging him for his

ruling regarding the silencer statute did not contain any

threats.   He claims that on March 1, 2009, the USMS Judicial

Security Division (“USMSJSD”) placed a “Notification” in

Crooker’s file indicating that he was under investigation for

posing a threat to a federal judge.   That Notification acted like

a detainer against him, causing him to be “overclassified” to a

higher security level.   He claims he used to be in a low-security

BOP facility, but is now classified in a medium-security facility

due to the security issues.

     The Government opposes this motion, again arguing that

Crooker may not file such a motion pro se.    Additionally, the

Government raises a number of other grounds, including that: (1)

this Court lacks jurisdiction to grant the relief requested by

                                  5
Crooker, because he is not challenging the constitutionality of

his conviction or sentence within the scope of 28 U.S.C.

§ 2255 (as he was acquitted); (2) Crooker’s arguable challenge to

the “manner of execution” of his sentence might be raised under

28 U.S.C. § 2241, but as such, must be brought in the District

where he is confined (New York), rather than this District; (3)

Crooker has failed to cite any legal authority authorizing this

Court to order the BOP to remove a document from its files which

requests the USMSJSD to be notified when Crooker is released or

relocated; (4) Crooker has failed to indicate that he has pursued

administrative remedies before seeking judicial intervention; and

(5) as a jurisprudential matter, even if this Court had

jurisdiction, it should decline to grant relief because it makes

sense for the USMSJSD to reevaluate Crooker’s potential threat to

a member of the judiciary when he is released from prison and

returns to the community where he was prosecuted, and that this

conclusion is made even more reasonable in light of Crooker’s

guilty plea and incarceration for sending a separate threatening

communication.

     In his reply, Crooker contends the issue is properly raised

in this action, that this issue should not be presented before

Judge Woodlock, and again reasserts the letter he sent was not

threatening.

                                6
                           II.   Discussion

A.   The Motions for Return of Property

     As a threshold matter, this Court will permit Crooker to

file his motions pro se, since he represents he does not wish to

proceed with appointed counsel in connection with this closed

action.   The fact that he has court-appointed counsel in the case

before Judge Woodlock does not impact his ability to seek post-

acquittal relief pro se in this case.      He may not, however, have

it both ways.

     Next, the Court disagrees with the Government that Crooker

cannot seek the return of property under Rule 41(g) because that

provision only applies to property seized unlawfully, and here,

Crooker’s property was lawfully seized.       Rule 41(g), however,

provides that “[a] person aggrieved by an unlawful search and

seizure of property or by the deprivation of property may move

for the property’s return.”      Fed. R. Crim. P. 41(g)(emphasis

added).   Thus, whether or not the search was lawful is not

dispositive.    Crooker has been deprived of property and may seek

its return in light of his acquittal.

     The Government contends that the evidence “may” be needed

for use in the event of a collateral attack with respect to

Crooker’s criminal case before Judge Woodlock.      Apparently,

court-appointed counsel in that case is negotiating with the

                                    7
Government to ensure preservation of relevant evidence and

release of the remainder.   As soon as that agreement has been

negotiated, this Court will Order the Government to return the

property listed in Crooker’s Amended Motion (Docket No. 273).

That agreement shall be finalized within 60 days unless the

Government moves for an extension.

     In light of the above, Crooker’s Renewed Motion for Return

of Property (Docket No. 272) is DENIED as superseded by an

amended motion; Crooker’s Amended and Renewed Motion for Return

of Property (Docket No. 273) is ALLOWED to the extent that the

Court Orders the Government to return the seized property in

accordance with the parameters of the negotiated agreement as set

forth above.

B.   The Motion for a Court Order to Remove Judicial Threat
     Notification

     Again, this Court will consider Crooker’s motion filed pro

se, for the reasons set forth above.   Nevertheless, this Court

agrees with much of the Government’s Opposition and finds that

this closed criminal case is not the proper forum to raise his

issue regarding the Judicial Threat Notification.   Because

Crooker has been acquitted in this criminal case, he does not

have relief available under the auspices of 28 U.S.C. § 2255.

Moreover, it appears that Crooker does not have relief available



                                 8
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2241 because he is not currently “in

custody” on any judgment rendered in this criminal case.    He is

in custody based on the criminal sentence imposed by Judge

Woodlock.   Moreover, he does not contend that his custody is in

violation of federal or constitutional law.   In any event, even

if § 2241 relief was available to challenge the manner of

execution of his sentence (as the Government suggests), this

Court lacks jurisdiction over any § 2241 habeas petition because

such a petition must be filed in the District where he is

confined (as the District with jurisdiction over Crooker’s

immediate custodian).   See Rumsfeld v. Padilla, 542 U.S. 426, 439

(2004)(immediate custodian of petitioner is proper respondent in

a habeas action).

     Finally, this Court notes another issue is raised by

Crooker’s filing of this motion in this closed case, which was

not addressed by any party.   This issue involves application of

the Prison Litigation Reform Act’s three-strike rule.

Crooker’s Motion for an Order to Remove Judicial Threat

Nomination is, in essence, a request for Declaratory or Mandamus

relief compelling a federal officer(s) to modify BOP files.

Alternatively, this issue involves a challenge to Crooker’s

conditions of confinement (in a higher security facility).    As

such, the relief sought is not habeas in nature (because it

                                 9
appears the relief would not result in a speedier or earlier

release from custody), but rather involves non-habeas relief.

Thus, a non-habeas civil action may be the proper vehicle for

seeking relief.4   However, as Crooker well knows based on his

very extensive civil litigation history, a federal civil action

carries a $350.00 filing fee.    He also knows that he is not

entitled to a waiver of that filing fee because he is a three-

strikes litigant under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g), and because the issue

presented does not involve any bona fide claim of imminent danger

that would exempt him from application of the three-strikes rule.

     Accordingly, this Court will not permit Crooker a means of

circumventing the filing fee requirements of this Court and the

Prison Litigation Reform Act by filing this motion in a closed

criminal action.

     In sum, for all the reasons set forth above, Crooker’s

Motion for an Order to Remove Judicial Threat Notification

(Docket No. 275) is DENIED.     The Court makes no ruling on the

merits of Crooker’s motion; the ruling is made on the grounds

that this closed case is not the proper vehicle for raising the

issues contained in the motion.




Crooker is subject to the Prison Litigation Reform Act that
4

requires, inter alia, a prisoner to exhaust administrative
remedies before filing suit. See 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(e).

                                  10
                        III.   Conclusion

     Based on the foregoing, it is hereby Ordered that:

1.   Crooker’s Renewed Motion for Return of Property (Docket No.
     272) is DENIED as superseded by an amended motion;

2.   Crooker’s Amended and Renewed Motion for Return of Property
     (Docket No. 273) is ALLOWED to the extent that the
     Government is ORDERED to return Crooker’s property in
     accordance with an agreement that is to be reached within 60
     days of the date of this Memorandum and Order between
     Crooker’s counsel and the Government in connection with CR
     07-30038-DPW, unless the Government moves for an extension
     of time;

3.   Crooker’s Motion for a Court Order to Remove Judicial Threat
     Notification (Docket No. 275) is DENIED; and

4.   Crooker’s Motion for Leave to File a Reply (Docket No. 278)
     is ALLOWED.



SO ORDERED.


                                      /s/ Patti B. Saris
                                     PATTI B. SARIS
                                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                11
