                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                    )
                                             )
v.                                           ) 1:11-cr-00054-JAW
                                             )
JOSEPH SMITH,                                )
                                             )
               Defendant                     )

               RECOMMENDED DECISION ON MOTION TO SUPPRESS
                             (DOC. NO. 15)

       Joseph Smith has moved to suppress all evidence seized during the execution of a state

court search warrant in September 2010. Smith claims that the affidavit submitted in support of

the search warrant application contains deliberately false information and/or omits material

information in a misleading fashion. Smith requests that this court hold an evidentiary hearing to

determine whether there are material omissions and false statements by law enforcement

personnel within the four corners of the affidavit under Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 155-

156 (1978). Based on the parties‟ written submissions and the arguments presented at oral

argument, I find that the defendant has not made the “substantial preliminary showing” necessary

in order to convene an evidentiary hearing, id., and therefore recommend that the court deny the

motion to suppress in the absence of a hearing.

                                The Search Warrant Affidavit

       Brian Ross, a Special Agent working for the Maine Drug Enforcement Agency, obtained

a search warrant from a State of Maine District Court Judge on September 6, 2010, in order to

search a remote camp located along a woods road in Township 6, Maine (north of Weld). The

camp is described as being owned by Joseph Smith, a sixty-three year old, long-time resident of

the area. Ross‟s search warrant affidavit consists of seventeen paragraphs of “historical”
information about Smith and his son, Tad Smith. Beginning in 1992, drug agents in the area

received information from a series of confidential informants that Joseph Smith and his son

annually cultivated a large number of marijuana plants at remote wooded locations in the vicinity

of their residences. In 1993 Joseph Smith‟s residence was searched pursuant to a warrant and

certain marijuana products were seized. In November of that year Smith pled guilty to

furnishing scheduled drugs in Franklin County Superior Court. According to confidential

sources, Smith‟s arrest and probationary sentence did not slow down the marijuana cultivation of

the Smiths, father or son.

       Through calendar year 2009 various law enforcement personnel continued to receive

sporadic reports that Joseph Smith remained involved in the commercial cultivation of

marijuana. Incidents involving reports of Joseph or Tad Smith‟s ongoing involvement in the sale

of substantial quantities of marijuana arose in 1994 (concerned citizen report of “common

knowledge”); 1996 (post-arrest interview of drug dealer identifies Tad and Joseph as his source

of supply); June 1999 (another concerned citizen reports father, son, and two others to be

growing over 2,000 plants annually in remote wooded locations after starting the plants in a

camp owned by Joseph); July 1999 (agents find and eradicate more than 800 marijuana plants

which concerned citizen says were only a part of Smith‟s plantings); September 1999 (arrested

drug dealer tells officers that the Smiths have 100 or more pounds of marijuana buried in cans in

the woods off the Number Six Road); October 1999 (confidential informant tells agents he has

observed seedlings being cultivated by Tad Smith); October-December 1999 (three controlled

purchases made from Tad Smith); January 2000 (search warrant at apartment house owned by

Tad Smith, arrested tenant identifies the growing equipment in apartment as belonging to Joseph

Smith); December 2000 (a fifth confidential source of information tells agents that Joseph Smith



                                                2
is still growing marijuana in the vicinity of the Number Six Road); and in June 2007 (a sixth

confidential source of information, not facing criminal charges, but angry with the Smiths,

reports that Joseph Smith takes guns in trade for marijuana and that he has seen a short barrel

shotgun at Smith‟s house).

       In August 2010, a seventh confidential source of information had a meeting with the

affiant. This person, an admitted marijuana user, informed the affiant that Tad and Joseph Smith

have grown marijuana in the vicinity of the Number Six Road for years and have been able to do

so successfully because they have created restricted access by putting gates across the road and

also digging out the road. This informant also reported that the father and son bury the

marijuana underground and that Joseph and Tad use heavy equipment when digging up the

marijuana stored in large containers in the ground. A Maine Forest Ranger told the affiant he

had been investigating Joseph Smith for allegedly digging up a logging road that allows access to

a woods road beyond the Number Six Road. The affiant investigated Tad Smith‟s camp and

found a well-worn path leading from the camp to a plot of marijuana plants. The forest ranger

then told the affiant that he had also found several marijuana plants growing not far from Joseph

Smith‟s camp when he was there investigating the damage to the logging road. The affiant and a

state trooper then went to Joseph Smith‟s camp and observed the roadway, which appeared to

have a trench dug across it. The affiant described the magnitude of the trenching as being an

extreme measure to prevent access to the area.

       On September 1, 2010, the affiant and a deputy sheriff parked at the spot where the

trench was dug. Using a map provided by the forest ranger, the affiant found the area where the

plants were growing. The affiant observed that these plants were growing in the same manner as

Tad Smith‟s plants, with car fresheners placed at the base of the marijuana stalk, perhaps in a



                                                 3
signature protective measure designed to discourage insect pests. In any event, the affiant had

observed the car fresheners inside the Tad Smith camp. The affiant observed very well-defined

ATV tracks to the start of the beaten foot path that led to the marijuana plants. The driveway

that accesses Joseph Smith‟s camp is the same driveway as the one to which the affiant had

followed the ATV tracks. The affiant observed that there was less than a mile between Joseph

Smith‟s camp and the marijuana grow located in the woods by the ranger.

       On September 6, 2010, the affiant drove to the road leading to Joseph Smith‟s camp. He

found a large, heavy metal gate secured by a padlock blocking access to the road leading to

Smith‟s driveway. After surveying the area and considering how to execute a search warrant of

the camp and curtilage, the affiant made application for a nighttime search warrant in the interest

of officer safety, given the remote location of the camp and the likelihood that there could be a

cache of firearms and ammunition on the premises. The warrant was signed by a judge at 2:11

p.m. on September 6, 2011, and executed sometime thereafter.

                                 Smith’s Preliminary Showing

       Smith does not dispute that the affidavit as submitted to the state court judge was based

on probable cause. His contention is that the representations about the intentional restriction of

access to the marijuana grow area and an “ATV trail” from the grow area to Smith‟s camp were

either deliberately false statements or were recklessly implied by omission of facts necessary to

the probable cause finding, particularly due to the mile distance between the camp and the grow

location. (Reply Mem. at 5, Doc. No. 24, Page ID # 107.) In support of this contention, Smith

has submitted his own affidavit in opposition to the search warrant affidavit. (Smith Aff., Doc.

No. 15-3.)




                                                 4
       Smith‟s first assertion is that Ross‟s statements contain material omissions about the

metal gate that would have established that the gate has no role in restricting access to the

marijuana grow which is over one mile into the woods from the remote camp location. First,

Smith asserts that the gate was an old cattle gate, not a heavy metal gate as described in the

affidavit. Second, he asserts that there were numerous ways to access the marijuana grow other

than by the gated road and he attaches a diagram to show how others could have accessed the

grow area without passing along the road. He claims that the omission of these other routes of

access is the most misleading fact in the affidavit. (Id. ¶ 4.) He also notes that Agent Ross did

not include the fact that Eugene Caton, a logger in the area, maintains a blue gate very close to

Smith‟s gate which is equally as much of a barricade as Smith‟s gate in terms of reaching the

marijuana grow.

       Next Smith argues that the ditches across the Number Six Road likewise did not impede

access to the grow area. Smith also claims that he did not dig the ditches, but rather they were

the result of natural erosion and failure to maintain the road. (Id. ¶ 5.) According to Smith, if

Ross and/or Rousseau had even done rudimentary investigation, they would have realized that

Smith did not dig any trenches across the road.

       Finally, Smith says that Ross‟s assertion about the ATV trail from the marijuana grow to

his camp is false, although many ATV trails exist in the area heading in many directions.

According to Smith, it is common knowledge in the area that there are numerous ways in and out

of this area by ATV without availing oneself of the Number Six Road. (Id. ¶ 4.)

                                         Legal Standard

       To overcome the presumption of validity of the search warrant affidavit and obtain a

Franks hearing, Smith must first make a showing that Ross included deliberate falsehoods or



                                                  5
omissions in his search warrant affidavit or recklessly disregarded the truth when he prepared the

affidavit. “The defendant „must make a substantial preliminary showing that the affidavit

included a false statement which was made either knowingly or intentionally or with reckless

disregard for the truth, and that this misstatement was necessary to the finding of probable

cause.‟” United States v. Materas, 483 F.3d 27, 31 (1st Cir. 2007) (quoting United States v.

Nelson-Rodriguez, 319 F.3d 12, 34 (1st Cir. 2003)). “A material omission in the affidavit may

also qualify for a Franks hearing in place of a false direct statement, provided the same requisite

showing is made.” Nelson-Rodriguez, 319 F.3d at 34. When the defendant complains of a

material omission, he must demonstrate that the omission was necessary to the finding of

probable cause, i.e., that inclusion of the omission would have negated the judicial officer‟s

finding of probable cause. United States v. Castillo, 287 F.3d 21, 25 n.4 (1st Cir. 2002).

        In addition to showing (1) the existence of a false statement or misleading omission and

(2) the materiality (as in necessity) of the challenged representation or omission to the probable

cause finding, the Franks standard also requires a showing of (3) a basis for inferring the

existence of scienter, or culpable state of mind, on the part of the affiant or another officer1 on

whom the affiant relied. Franks, 438 U.S. at 171-72; see also United States v. D‟Andrea, __F.3d

___, Nos. 08-2455, 09-1018, 2011 WL 1760207, *9, 2011 U.S. App. Lexis 9541, *31-32 (1st

Cir. May 10, 2011) (observing that the truthfulness of a government agent might be examined

under Franks when that agent supplies the affiant with materially false information); United


1
          Smith spends a great deal of his time attacking Rousseau‟s credibility and suggesting that the material
omissions regarding the “lay of the land” arose because of Rousseau‟s deliberate omissions of material facts. There
is no question but that if Smith had made a substantial preliminary showing, including the material nature of these
omissions, he would be entitled to a Franks hearing. The Franks hearing cannot be used to test the truthfulness of a
tipster or informant, but it could apply to deliberate misstatements by government actors other than the affiant,
according to the D‟Andrea opinion, cited above. Smith‟s showing regarding Rousseau, at best, is that Rousseau‟s
investigation had not been as thorough as Smith would have liked and that Rousseau omitted certain geographic
facts (the blue Caton gate and the supposedly numerous ATV trails) that were not material omissions for purposes of
the probable cause determination.

                                                         6
States v. Maynard, 615 F.3d 544, 551 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (observing that when defendant fails to

produce probative evidence of affiant‟s scienter, trial court should not speculate about what the

officer may have known); United States v. Skinner, 972 F.2d 171, 177 (7th Cir. 1992) (“The

defendant must offer direct evidence of the affiant‟s state of mind or inferential evidence that the

affiant had obvious reasons for omitting facts in order to prove deliberate falsehood or reckless

disregard.”) (internal quotation marks omitted); United States v. Post, 607 F.2d 847, 849 n.2 (9th

Cir. 1979) (noting that “scienter and materiality” are required); U.S. v. Castillo, No. CR-05-81-

P-H, 2006 WL 217983, *3, 2006 U.S. Dist. Lexis 3288, *7 (D. Me. Jan. 26, 2006) (Cohen, Mag.

J., Mot. for Reconsideration) (flagging the need for “state of mind” evidence and citing Skinner,

supra).

                                            Discussion

          Smith‟s theory has two components. First he complains that Ross (perhaps abetted by the

forest ranger) deliberately omitted key facts about the existence of other ATV trails in the area

and the nature of the obstructions (gates and trench) to the Number Six Road. The fact that

Rousseau, as a forest ranger familiar with the area, should have known that there were numerous

other ATV trails in the area that might have been used to access this marijuana grow site, does

not show that Ross made a material omission that would have negated the finding of probable

cause. Assuming that Rousseau knew about the other trails and did not convey that information

to Ross—because there is absolutely no suggestion that Ross himself knowingly or with reckless

disregard for the truth omitted that fact—it is simply not a material omission that negates

probable cause. The issuing judicial officer would have known from the affidavit that the affiant

was talking about a remote woods location that was accessed for logging purposes and

apparently for growing marijuana. It would surprise no one familiar with the Maine woods to



                                                 7
learn that there were old woods roads or ATV trails running through the woods and thus

providing a possible means, other than by the Number Six Road, to access a field of marijuana

growing in the middle of nowhere. Smith makes no showing that there were others in the area

who had been the subject of police investigation for cultivating marijuana for over fifteen years

and who had a camp less than a mile from the grow site, nor that any of these numerous other

trails led directly to the beaten footpath or to the marijuana grow site. I therefore conclude that,

even if Ross had included the fact that it was possible for someone on an ATV or on foot to

circumvent the obstacles placed in the roadway, it would not have negated the probable cause

supporting the issuance of the warrant. None of the numerous ATV trails or woods roads

identified by Smith in his diagram are shown as leading directly toward the alleged marijuana

grow site, so the fact that an ATV could take someone to within a few miles of the grow site, or

give them access to the Number Six Road, would not negate probable cause. Nor can this court

infer Ross‟s (or Rousseau‟s) state of mind regarding this omission without probative evidence

that he had actual knowledge regarding the existence of these supposedly numerous trails that led

to the general area.

       The second series of claimed deliberate omissions pertains to the alleged obstructions to

the Number Six Road allegedly installed by Smith. First, the omission of the Eugene Caton gate

is irrelevant. According to Smith‟s own exhibit, Caton‟s blue gate was across a spur road off the

Number Six Road that headed in the general direction of Weld, Maine. (Smith‟s hand-drawn

map, Smith Aff. Ex. 1, Doc. No. 15-3.) The Eugene Caton gate did not block access to the

Number Six Road and omitting it from the affidavit, assuming one or both officers even knew

about it, had no effect on the probable cause finding. One thing that Smith‟s hand-drawn map

makes clear is that the primary way to access the marijuana site would be from the Number Six



                                                  8
Road where it turns off of Route 4. Even though the Number Six Road belongs to a paper

company, Smith admits he constructed a locked gate to block access from Route 4.

        The claimed “omission” involving the trenches is apparently related to Rousseau‟s

independent investigation into the cause of the trenching, due to a complaint from the paper

company. Unlike the gate, the trenching dispute relates to a “back access way.” (Search Warr.

Aff. ¶ 25; see also Smith‟s hand-drawn map.) A confidential source told Ross that Smith had

dug trenches in the road to discourage access near where he was growing marijuana. (Search

Warr. Aff. ¶ 19.) Smith says in his affidavit he never dug any trenches and the trench was the

result of spring runoff and natural erosion. Perhaps further investigation would prove that Smith

is correct, but Rousseau‟s failure to complete his investigation does not negate the fact that Ross

saw a huge trench directly in front of a logging road bridge crossing a brook and both his

confidential source and Rousseau had informed him they had reason to believe Smith was the

architect of the trench. Nothing submitted by Smith casts any doubt upon certain essential facts

alleged in the affidavit. Rousseau was there as a result of complaints by the paper company and

he was in the midst of his investigation regarding the story behind the trench. Ross talked to a

confidential source with personal knowledge of the marijuana operation who told him about the

trench. That Ross leapt to a logical, but perhaps erroneous conclusion regarding the genesis of

the trench does not negate probable cause and it certainly does not present a substantial showing

of a deliberate falsehood or reckless disregard of the truth.

        Finally, I come to the crucial allegation in Smith‟s affidavit. He says that Ross lied about

an ATV “trail” leading directly from the marijuana grow site to the driveway of Smith‟s camp.2



2
        At oral argument, Smith argued that Ross‟s affidavit suggested the existence of a “straight arrow” or
“breadcrumb” ATV trail that does not actually exist. I do not read the affidavit in this fashion. In any event,
although such evidence would certainly generate probable cause, lesser evidence concerning ATV tracks could

                                                         9
However, a careful reading of the competing affidavits is not favorable to Smith. Ross affirmed

the following:

         27. On 09/01/2010, Franklin County Sergeant Steven Lowell and I parked at the
         spot where JOSEPH SMITH allegedly dug out the road. We followed the map
         provided to me by Forest Ranger Rousseau. We found the area that the plants
         were growing in. . . . I observed that there were very well defined ATV tracks
         leading to the start of the beaten trail that led to the marijuana plants.

                  ...
         29. I entered the GPS coordinates of the marijuana grow that Forest Ranger
         Rousseau found . . . and the GPS coordinates taken by Tpr. Casavant from the air
         of JOSEPH‟s camp . . . and found that this distance is less than one mile. While
         typically a mile might seem to be a long distance to associate marijuana plants
         with a residence, in this case there is a very clearly defined and well traveled ATV
         trail that leads down a (sic) old gravel logging road from JOSEPH‟s camp to the
         marijuana plants. The tracks that Tpr. Casavant and I followed are the same
         tracks that I observed driving to the beginning of the foot path that leads to the
         marijuana plants. Also, since the SMITHS have restricted access to this remote
         area, it is unlikely that anyone else is able to pass the closed, locked gates or
         travel over the trenches dug in the road by the SMITHS.

Search Warr. Aff., ¶¶ 27, 29 (Doc. No. 15-2) (emphasis added).

         In comparison, Smith‟s claim of a substantial preliminary showing consists of the

following assertion in his affidavit:

         6. In Agent Ross‟s affidavit, he suggests that there was an ATV-type trail
         leading from the marijuana grow in some way to my camp. This is not
         true, although the area is covered with ATV trails in many directions.

Smith Aff. ¶ 6 (Doc. No. 15-3).

         The issue is whether this swearing contest between Ross and Smith is a substantial

preliminary showing that Ross deliberately or with reckless disregard of the truth made a false

statement that was material to the determination of probable cause. I conclude that this showing

falls short of the substantial showing required to justify a Franks hearing. In paragraph 27 of his

affidavit, Ross indicated that there was a footpath (“beaten trail”) that left the gravel logging

easily establish probable cause, too, especially when the other representations in the affidavit are factored into the
analysis. Arguably, the ATV tracks are not even necessary to the probable cause finding.

                                                           10
road. He also stated that the ATV tracks ran from the driveway down the logging road to the

start of the footpath. This description does not generate an impression that there is a separate and

distinct ATV trail running from Smith‟s camp all the way to the grow location, which is the

impression that Smith is trying to undermine in his affidavit. In paragraph 29 of Ross‟s affidavit,

Ross did write that “there is a very clearly defined and well traveled ATV trail that leads down

[an] old gravel logging road from JOSEPH‟s camp to the marijuana plants,” but he had

previously indicated in paragraph 27 that there was a footpath from the road to the plants and he

also repeated that he was describing the “same tracks” previously described as running on the

logging road. Ross‟s description, in other words, does not represent that an ATV trail ran from

the grow location to the camp. He clearly indicated that the ATV tracks ran on the logging road

from the driveway of the camp to the footpath leading into the location of the plants. Search

warrant affidavits are to be read in a common sense manner and hypertechnical readings are to

be avoided. United States v. Barnes, 492 F.3d 33, 37-38 (1st Cir. 2007). Smith‟s argument

attempts to force an inference that is contradicted by a complete reading of the affidavit. When

paragraphs 27 and 29 are read together, Ross‟s description of the road and footpath essentially

agrees with Smith‟s map.

       In sum, Smith‟s affidavit testimony does not raise an inference that Ross‟s search warrant

affidavit was drawn with reckless disregard for the truth, let alone contained known and

intentional falsehoods. Moreover, the qualifications that Smith seeks to introduce fail to negate

the multiple bases for a probable cause finding. These include the Smiths‟ marijuana cultivation

history, the statements from the confidential source concerning the Smith‟s reputed cultivation

activities in areas off the Number Six Road and the Small Road and their efforts to restrict access

to the area, the evidence associated with Tad Smith‟s camp and another nearby plot of marijuana,



                                                11
the use of the car deodorizers, the apparent effort to prevent use of the bridge on the old logging

road, which would provide a back access to the grow location down the way from Joseph

Smith‟s camp, the gate placed at the head of the Number Six Road, and the presence of ATV

tracks along the logging road that ran from the driveway of Joseph Smith‟s camp to the head of

the footpath leading to a marijuana plot. Given this assortment of evidence, the affidavit

demonstrated a “fair probability” of contraband being found in all of the Smiths‟ premises in the

remote area of the Number Six Road and the Small Road and the assertions in Joseph Smith‟s

affidavit simply fail to negate the basis for including his camp as one of the premises that could

be searched pursuant to a warrant. Barnes, 492 F.3d at 36.

                                            Conclusion

       Based upon the foregoing I find that Smith has not made a substantial preliminary

showing that would warrant convening a Franks hearing and I recommend that the Court deny

the motion to suppress.

                                             NOTICE

                A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
       judge's report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
       28 U.S.C. 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
       together with a supporting memorandum, and request for oral argument before the
       district judge, if any is sought, within fourteen (14) days of being served with a
       copy thereof. A responsive memorandum and any request for oral argument
       before the district judge shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the filing of
       the objection.

              Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
       novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court's order.

                                              /s/ Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                              U.S. Magistrate Judge
       July 27, 2011




                                                 12
