                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                )
                                        )
      v.                                )     1:11-cr-00053-JAW
                                        )
KEVIN EARL SPRING                       )


                      ORDER ON MOTIONS TO DISMISS

      The Court concludes that the Defendant‟s due process argument may not be

reached in a motion to dismiss the indictment because it depends upon the

resolution of facts that must be decided by a jury. The Court further concludes that

the Government has not violated the Speedy Trial Act‟s thirty-day provision

between arrest and indictment and that charges brought under 18 U.S.C. §

922(a)(6) and § 924(a)(1)(A) are not multiplicitous.

I.    STATEMENT OF FACTS

      On April 13, 2011, a federal grand jury indicted Kevin Earl Spring for

making a false statement in connection with the acquisition of a firearm, an alleged

violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6). Indictment (Docket # 38). On May 18, 2011, a

federal grand jury issued a superseding indictment, adding two counts to the April

13, 2011 indictment: Count II, making a false statement in connection with the

purchase of a firearm, a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(a)(1), and Count III, possession

of a firearm by a person previously committed to a mental institution, a violation of

18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4).     On June 14, 2011, Mr. Spring moved to dismiss the

indictment based on due process, speedy trial, and multiplicity grounds. Def.’s Mot.
to Dismiss the Superseding Indictment (Docket # 76) (Due Process Mot.); Def.’s Mot.

to Dismiss Count III of the Superseding Indictment for Speedy Trial Violation and to

Dismiss Count II as Being Multiplicious (Docket # 77) (Speedy Trial and

Multiplicity Mot.).

      A.         Due Process Motion

             1.       Kevin Earl Spring’s Contentions

      To his motion, Mr. Spring attached a discharge summary from an emergency

admission to Penobscot Bay Medical Center (PenBay). Due Process Mot. Attach. 1

at 1, Penobscot Bay Medical Center Discharge Summary (Docket # 76) (Discharge

Summary).        According to the discharge summary, on December 29, 2010, Mr.

Spring called the police to his home in Owls Head, Maine, claiming he was sure he

had heard “footsteps” and “whisperings of a couple of kids who had worked for him

in his basement,” and he thought they were stealing from him. Discharge Summary

at 1. He explained that “those kids may be doing this for retribution.” Id. The

police thought he might be “delusional and hallucinating” and brought him to

Penobscot Bay Hospital where he was kept until January 4, 2011. Id. Mr. Spring

refused all psychotropic medication and was given psychotherapy and milieu

therapy.   Id.    The discharge summary states that during his hospital stay, he

evidenced no “paranoia or delusions, hallucinations, suicidality, or homicidality,

though he appeared somewhat odd and eccentric at times.” Id. at 2. His mental

status at discharge was “alert, oriented, cooperative, pleasant, and polite, in no

distress without signs of intoxication or withdrawal.” Id. The discharge summary



                                         2
concluded that “[t]he patient was not judged suicidal, homicidal, psychotic or

dangerous to himself or others at the time of discharge. There was no imminent

danger.” Id.

      Mr. Spring says that there is a legal difference between an emergency

admission to a hospital and a commitment.         Due Process Mot. at 2-3.      While

acknowledging that the First Circuit has concluded that Maine‟s “blue paper”

emergency admission process constitutes a commitment, Mr. Spring contends that

the concept of commitment should not be extended to a temporary detention

because it deprives a person of a constitutional right without due process of law. Id.

at 3. Further, it categorizes all persons who have been subject to an emergency

admission as dangerous, which in Mr. Spring‟s view is an overly broad statutory

category that does not withstand intermediate scrutiny. Id.

      Mr. Spring also asserts that “[o]n January 27, 2011, Mr. Spring went to

[Willey‟s] Sports Center in Ellsworth, Maine, where he discussed the purchase of a

Glock pistol. Mr. Spring handled the pistol he selected, paid the purchase price and

filled out the ATF Form 4473.      In block 11(f) of that [form] Mr. Spring gave a

negative answer to the question asking whether he had ever been committed to a

mental institution.” Id. at 4.

      Based on these facts, Mr. Spring contends that despite the First Circuit case

of United States v. Chamberlain, 159 F.3d 656 (1st Cir. 1998), the blue paper

process in Maine “does not provide the procedures needed to comply with the due

process clause.” Due Process Mot. at 10. He also urges the Court to reexamine



                                          3
Chamberlain in view of the United States Supreme Court‟s 2008 decision in District

of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008) in which the Court interpreted the

Second Amendment as conferring an individual right to keep and bear arms. Due

Process Mot. at 10-11.

               2.     The Government’s Response

         In its response, the Government posits a number of facts that were not

included in Mr. Spring‟s motion. Resp. of the United States to Def.’s Mot. to Dismiss

the Superseding Indictment (Docket # 83) (Gov’t’s Due Process Resp.). It attached

documents that reveal that a crisis clinician completed and signed an application

for emergency committal or what the state of Maine refers to as a “blue paper.” Id.

Attach. 1, Application for Emergency Involuntary Admission to a Mental Hospital

(Docket # 83). It indicates that a physician certified Mr. Spring as mentally ill and

posing a risk of serious harm and that a judicial officer authorized placing him in

custody and transporting him to the psychiatric unit at PenBay.              Id.   The

Government contends that this procedure has withstood legal attack. Gov’t’s Due

Process Resp. at 4-19.

         B.     Speedy Trial and Multiplicity Motion

               1.     The Defendant’s Contentions

         Mr. Spring‟s speedy trial and multiplicity motion recites the complete history

of this case, tracing the initiation of the first charge to a February 16, 2011 sealed

criminal complaint. Speedy Trial and Multiplicity Mot. at 2 (citing Compl. (Docket

# 1)).    The complaint alleged that Mr. Spring had purchased a Glock pistol on



                                            4
January 27, 2011 after having previously been committed to PenBay, and therefore

had possessed a firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4). Compl. at 1. Mr.

Spring was arrested on a warrant on February 23, 2011 in the commonwealth of

Massachusetts and he came into the custody of the United States Marshal for the

District of Maine on March 10, 2011. Speedy Trial and Multiplicity Mot. at 2. The

Court held an initial appearance on March 15, 2011 and at that hearing, counsel

jointly agreed to a thirty-day tolling of the speedy trial clock regarding the time to

indictment, an agreement that was reduced to a court order on March 17, 2011,

excluding the period from March 15, 2011 through April 14, 2011 from speedy trial

clock calculations. Id.

      On April 13, 2011, a federal grand jury indicted Mr. Spring for making a false

statement in connection with the purchase of a firearm at Willey‟s Sports Center on

January 27, 2011, an alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6); unlike the criminal

complaint, the indictment did not charge him with unlawful possession. Id. at 2-3.

The speedy trial clock began to run on April 15, 2011. Id. at 4. Mr. Spring was

arraigned on April 29, 2011. Id. On May 5, 2011, the Government moved for trial

witness subpoenas, access to documents needed to prepare for trial, and permission

for potential trial witnesses to discuss protected health information with

government investigators.     Id.   On May 12, 2011, defense counsel requested

additional time to prepare pretrial motions and on the same day, the Court issued a

Speedy Trial Order, granting the motion and excluding the period from May 13,

2011 through May 27, 2011 from speedy trial act calculations. Id. On May 18,



                                          5
2011, a grand jury issued a superseding indictment, adding Counts II and III, as

earlier noted.    Id.    Mr. Spring moves to dismiss Count III of the superseding

indictment on the ground that the speedy trial clock has run because the

Government‟s May 5, 2011 motion related only to trial and did not toll the thirty-

day clock. Id. Including the time from the May 5, 2011 motion, Mr. Spring says

that the thirty-day indictment clock window has lapsed. Id.

      Mr. Spring also seeks the dismissal of Count II of the superseding indictment

on the ground that Count I is “exactly the same transaction and contains exactly

the same elements as Count I.” Id.

             2.         The Government’s Response

      The Government runs through a separate set of speedy trial calculations and

concludes that the “grand jury returned its initial indictment on April 13, 2011, a

day before expiration of the period of exclusion.” Resp. of United States to Def.’s

Mot. to Dismiss Count III of the Superseding Indictment for Speedy Trial Violation

and to Dismiss Count II as Being Multiplicitous at 4 (Docket # 84) (Gov’t’s Speedy

Trial and Multiplicity Resp.).

      Turning to the multiplicity issue, the Government says that although the two

counts are similar, they contain different elements:       to prove a violation of §

922(a)(6), the Government must prove that a defendant‟s “statement was intended

to, or likely to, deceive the firearms dealer about a fact „material‟ to the lawfulness

of the sale” and to prove a violation of § 924(a)(1)(A), the Government must prove

that a defendant‟s statement was “made with respect to information that the law



                                          6
requires a federally licensed firearms dealer to keep.” Id. at 7. In other words,

unlike § 922(a)(6), § 924(a)(1)(A) contains no materiality element.                     Id.    The

Government quotes from an Eleventh Circuit case, United States v. Hawkins, 794

F.2d 589 (11th Cir. 1986), which concludes that the two statutory provisions charge

different crimes.

               3.      Defendant’s Reply

       Mr. Spring replied only to the Government‟s arguments on the Speedy Trial

Act calculations. Def.’s Reply Mem. – Mot. to Dismiss Count III of the Superseding

Indictment for Speedy Trial Violation and to Dismiss Count II as Being

Multiplicious (Docket # 85) (Def.’s Reply). In his Reply, Mr. Spring says that the

Government identified “the incorrect speedy trial timeframe,” noting that the

ending point is not the filing of the original indictment, but the filing of the

superseding indictment. Id. at 1. Mr. Spring points out that the original complaint

contained the charge of possession of a firearm by a person previously committed to

a mental institution, the original indictment did not, and the superseding

indictment did.1 Id. He claims the speedy trial analysis must run from February

23, 2011, the date of his arrest, until May 18, 2011, the date of the superseding

indictment. Id. at 1-2. Using the Government‟s own calculations, he says that the

period from April 15, 2011 through May 4, 2011 is countable time—a total of 20

days. Id. at 2. He argues that this leaves the one decisive question—“whether the



1 The Defendant‟s Reply actually refers to the charge of possession of a firearm by a felon, but the
Court assumes this was a mistake. Def.’s Reply at 1. There is no other suggestion that Mr. Spring is
a felon.

                                                 7
filing of a „pretrial motion‟ tolls the running of the speedy indictment clock or

merely the speedy trial clock.” Id.

II.   DISCUSSION

      A.     Legal Standards for a Motion to Dismiss

      By returning an indictment, a grand jury is carrying out a constitutional

function contemplated in the Bill of Rights. U.S. CONST. amend. V (“No person shall

be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a

presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury . . . .”).       Unlike civil actions, an

indictment is not generally subject to dispositive motion practice. “[D]ismissing an

indictment is an extraordinary step.” United States v. Li, 206 F.3d 56, 62 (1st Cir.

2000) (quoting United States v. Stokes, 124 F.3d 39, 44 (1st Cir. 1997)).         In

Whitehouse v. United States District Court, the First Circuit observed that “[w]hen a

federal court uses its supervisory power to dismiss an indictment it directly

encroaches upon the fundamental role of the grand jury.             That power is

appropriately reserved, therefore, for extremely limited circumstances.” 53 F.3d

1349, 1360 (1st Cir. 1995) (citing Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States, 487 U.S.

250, 263 (1988)).

      In this case, as a predicate for each Count, the superseding indictment

alleges that Mr. Spring had been “committed to a mental institution.” Superseding

Indictment at 1-3. There is nothing on the face of the indictment that suggests he

was not so committed. In his attempt to dismiss the superseding indictment, Mr.

Spring attached a copy of the discharge summary from his hospital stay and argues



                                         8
that as a matter of law, the hospital record does not reveal facts sufficient to

constitute a “commitment.” Due Process Mot. at 4-10.

      In essence, Mr. Spring‟s motion attempts to test the sufficiency of an

indictment by testing the sufficiency of the evidence to support the indictment. This

procedure is unknown in criminal law. Unlike a complaint initiating a civil action,

“an indictment is not generally subject to dispositive motion practice.”       United

States v. Poulin, 645 F. Supp. 2d 17, 22 (D. Me. 2009); see also Li, 206 F.3d at 62.

Thus, this Court‟s supervisory power over indictments should be reserved “for

extremely limited circumstances.” Whitehouse, 53 F.3d at 1360; see also United

States v. Morrison, 449 U.S. 361, 365 (1981) (concluding that the dismissal of an

indictment was unwarranted absent a constitutional violation that prejudiced

defendant‟s case); Li, 206 F.3d at 62 (declining to dismiss an indictment based on an

asserted violation of the Vienna Convention).

      Although framed as a motion to dismiss the indictment, Mr. Spring really has

no quarrel with the sufficiency of the indictment. For example, he does not claim it

fails to allege an essential element of the offense nor does he assert a jurisdictional

flaw. Instead, he posits evidence he claims the Government would offer at trial to

support its case that a “commitment” took place and evidence he claims he would

offer at trial to support his due process defense, and he seeks to have the indictment

dismissed on that basis. In response, the Government posits evidence that it says it

would present at trial to demonstrate that Mr. Spring was, in fact, committed.




                                          9
      This procedure—by both the Defendant and the Government—is contrary to

law. As Charles Alan Wright and Andrew D. Leipold explain:

      If a pretrial motion attacks the sufficiency of the indictment or
      information, the allegations of the pleading must be taken as true.
      Although Rule 47 permits affidavits in support of motions, neither it
      nor Rule 12 was intended to permit “speaking motions,” that is,
      motions that require consideration of facts outside the pleadings. Were
      the rule otherwise, the truth of the allegations could be challenged by
      affidavit, and the pretrial motion could be turned into a trial of the
      general issue. This is not to say, of course, that courts may not
      consider and resolve fact questions when ruling on motions prior to
      trial, it just may not resolve matters that constitutionally must be
      decided by a jury.

1A CHARLES ALAN WRIGHT & ANDREW D. LEIPOLD, FEDERAL PRACTICE                     AND


PROCEDURE § 194 (4th ed. 2008). For example, a court may resolve pre-trial matters

such as motions to suppress, discovery disputes, and joinder issues. Id. at § 194 n.7;

FED. R. CRIM. P. 12, Advisory Comm. Notes (1944) (listing motions that must and

may be raised pretrial). Here, however, Mr. Spring asks the Court to dismiss an

indictment based on facts that run to the quality of the Government‟s proof and to

facts essential to his defense, but only a jury can evaluate the persuasiveness of

evidence. See U.S. CONST. amend. VI (“[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused

shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State

and district wherein the crime shall have been committed”); FED. R. CRIM. P.

12(b)(2) (“A party may raise by pretrial motion any defense, objection, or request

that the court can determine without a trial of the general issue”) (emphasis

supplied).

      Thus, if this case were to proceed to trial, the Government would be required

to establish that Mr. Spring had in fact been “committed to a mental institution,” an
                                         10
element the superseding indictment alleges in Counts One through Three. In his

Model Jury Instructions, Judge Hornby defines “involuntary commitment”:

      An “involuntary commitment” occurs when a state judge, pursuant to
      an application for involuntary admission to a mental hospital,
      authorizes a law enforcement officer to take a person into custody and
      transport him to a hospital.

Judge D. Brock Hornby‟s 2011 Revisions to Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions for

the Dist. Cts. § 4.18.922(g) (updated Feb. 20, 2007); see also id. Comment 9 and

cases cited therein. Whether the Government produces sufficient evidence to satisfy

this legal standard cannot be a matter for dispositive ruling. Of course, during

trial, upon motion, the Court may be required to rule on the legal sufficiency of the

Government‟s evidence on this and other elements of the charges.                 If the

Government fails to convince the jury that Mr. Spring was involuntarily committed

within the meaning of this definition, he will be acquitted, and if he is convicted, the

Court may be required—again upon motion—to determine the legal sufficiency of

the evidence.    However, what Mr. Spring is seeking is more in the nature of a

motion for summary judgment, proffering his version of the evidence and

maintaining that it is insufficient to meet the legal standard. To the extent that the

Court may reach the issues he is attempting to raise, it may do so only upon “a trial

of the general issue.” FED. R. CRIM. P. 12(b)(2).

      B.        Speedy Trial

      Mr. Spring‟s second ground for dismissal, which is limited to Count III of the

superseding indictment, is an asserted violation of the Speedy Trial Act. Mr. Spring

is correct that if the complaint that resulted in the defendant‟s arrest contains a

                                          11
charge not contained in the original indictment but added in a superseding

indictment, which is not filed within thirty days of the original complaint, the

charge is subject to dismissal. United States v. Davis, 721 F. Supp. 2d 59, 60 (D.

Me. 2010) (citing 18 U.S.C. §§ 3161(b), 3162(a)(1)).

      Here, the February 18, 2011 criminal complaint contained a single count, an

alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4), knowing possession of a firearm after

having been committed to a mental institution.          Compl. at 1.     The original

indictment of April 13, 2011 charged Mr. Spring with a different crime, an alleged

violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(a)(6) and 924(a)(2), making a false and fictitious

statement in connection with the purchase of a firearm. Indictment at 1. The May

18, 2011 superseding indictment re-charged Mr. Spring with possession of a firearm

after having been committed to a mental institution under 18 U.S.C. § 924(a)(1)(A),

the same charge found in the criminal complaint. Superseding Indictment at 2.

The facts in this case fit squarely within Davis and the Court applies its teaching.

      Section 3161(b) of title 18 provides:

      Any . . . indictment charging an individual with the commission of an
      offense shall be filed within thirty days from the date on which such
      individual was arrested . . . in connection with such charges.

18 U.S.C. § 3161(b). Thirty days from February 23, 2011 was March 25, 2011, the

date that an indictment had to be filed under the Speedy Trial Act.          The Act

expressly exempts certain specified periods of time from counting. See 18 U.S.C. §

3161 et. seq.   Here, the parties agree that because Mr. Spring was arrested in

Massachusetts and not brought into the custody of the District of Maine until



                                          12
March 10, 2011, this interval is excluded under § 3161(h)(1)(E) and (F). This starts

the speedy trial clock counting as of March 10, 2011, with the thirty day period

expiring on April 8, 2011.

      On March 17, 2011, the Court issued an Order excluding the period from

March 15, 2011 until April 14, 2011. Five days lapsed before the March 17, 2011

Order was issued. As of April 14, 2011, the Government had twenty-five days to

issue an indictment, until May 8, 2011.

      On May 5, 2011, the Government moved for an order requiring disclosure of

health information. Mot. of the United States for an Order Requiring Disclosure of

Health Information for a Law Enforcement Purpose (Docket # 47). The Court acted

on this motion on May 18, 2011 (Docket # 55), the same day the grand jury issued

the superseding indictment (Docket # 57). If the motion for an order requiring

disclosure is the type of motion that tolls the running of the speedy trial clock, the

superseding indictment was timely.         If the motion is not, the superseding

indictment was issued too late.

      The applicable exclusion provides:

      (h) The following periods of delay shall be excluded in computing the
      time within which an information or an indictment must be filed . . .:

         (D) delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing of
         the motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other
         prompt disposition of, such motion.

18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(1)(D). Mr. Spring says that the Government‟s motion for an

order requiring disclosure is not necessarily the type of motion that tolls the

running of the thirty-day speedy trial clock between complaint and indictment.

                                           13
Def.’s Speedy Trial and Multiplicity Mot. at 5-9.       He points out that the plain

language of the statute makes it clear that it is not the filing of a pretrial motion

that tolls the speedy trial clock, but rather the delay occasioned by the filing of such

a motion. Id. at 6. Mr. Spring argues that when a pretrial motion is filed between

indictment and trial, the resolution of the motion commonly delays the scheduling

of trial; however, when a pretrial motion is filed on an existing indictment, unless

the motion is directly related to the charge later brought in the superseding

indictment, the pendency of a pretrial motion does not affect the Government‟s

ability to present new charges to a grand jury.

      The problem with Mr. Spring‟s argument is that it is flatly contrary to the

Supreme Court‟s decision in United States v. Tinklenberg, 131 S. Ct. 2007 (2011).

In Tinklenberg, the Supreme Court rejected the Sixth Circuit‟s view that the

language of the statute imposes a causation requirement.           Id. at 2016.    The

Tinklenberg Court “disagree[d] with the Sixth Circuit that the Act‟s exclusion

requires a court to find that the event the exclusion specifically describes, here the

filing of the pretrial motion, actually caused or was expected to cause delay of a

trial,” holding that “the Act contains no such requirement.” Id.

      In fact, in Bloate v. United States, 130 S. Ct. 1345, 1349 n.1 (2010), the

United States Supreme Court characterized the excludability of delay resulting

from the filing of a pretrial motion as “„automatic‟ in the sense that a district court

must exclude such delay from a Speedy Trial Act calculation without any further

analysis as to whether the benefit of the delay outweighs its cost.” Id. The Bloate



                                          14
Court further explained that “[f]or delays resulting from proceedings under

subsection (h)(1), Congress already has determined that the benefit of such delay

outweighs its cost to a speedy trial, regardless of the specifics of the case.” Id.

      Faced with Tinklenberg and Bloate, Mr. Spring insists that the thirty-day

period from arrest to indictment is different from the seventy-day period from

indictment to trial. Mr. Spring makes some reasonable policy arguments for why

Congress should have treated the thirty-day period differently from the seventy-day

period. Nevertheless, his policy arguments draw no support from the language of

the statute itself, which treats the two periods precisely the same:

      (h) The following periods of delay shall be excluded in computing the
      time within which an information or an indictment must be filed, or in
      computing the time within which the trial of any such offense must
      commence:

          (1) Any period of delay resulting from other proceedings
          concerning the defendant, including but not limited to —

             (D) delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the
             filing of the motion through the conclusion of the hearing
             on, or other prompt disposition of, such motion.

18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(1)(D). Even though the Court is sympathetic to Mr. Spring‟s

view that it would be logical to treat the two periods differently for some motions

that have a direct relevance to post-indictment proceedings, the statutory language

simply does not do so.

      Once the period from May 5, 2011 to May 18, 2011 is added to the other

periods excluded under § 3161(h)(1)(D), the Court concludes that the superseding

indictment was permissibly filed within thirty days of Mr. Spring‟s arrest.



                                           15
      C.      Multiplicity

      Mr. Spring‟s last contention is that the counts I and II of the superseding

indictment allege the same offense. He says that “Mr. Spring is charged twice with

making the same false statement on the same form.” Def.’s Speedy Trial and

Multiplicity Mot. at 10. He summarizes that “a single false statement to obtain a

single firearm on a single day constitutes a single unit of prosecution.”       Id. He

insists that the Government “needs to pick one” charge, not two. Id.

      He is wrong. The test for determining whether charges are multiplicitous is

found in Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932). In Blockburger, the

Supreme Court wrote that “[t]he applicable rule is that, where the same act or

transaction constitutes a violation of two distinct statutory provisions, the test to be

applied to determine whether there are two offenses or only one, is whether each

provision requires proof of a fact which the other does not.” Id.

      It is true that 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6) and § 924(a)(1)(A) contain a number of

common elements: 1) the mens rea standard is “knowingly” in both, 2) the

statement has to have been made to a “federally licensed firearms dealer,” and the

statement must have been “false.”         However, § 922(a)(6) requires that the

Government prove that the false statement was “intended or likely to deceive” the

dealer; this statutory requirement is known as the materiality requirement. United

States v. Whitney, 524 F.3d 134, 138 (1st Cir. 2008) (noting that the trial court had

instructed the jury that the false statement must be “material” to the lawfulness of

the sale). There is no similar materiality requirement in § 924(a)(1)(A). United



                                          16
States v. Sullivan, 459 F.2d 993, 994 (8th Cir. 1972) (“While a violation of 18 U.S.C.

§ 922(a)(6) expressly requires a showing of materiality no such expression is found

in § 924(a).”); United States v. Waddell, No. 97-10076, 1998 U.S. App. LEXIS 10402

at *1 (9th Cir. May 11, 1998).

       Conversely, to establish a case under § 924(a)(1)(A), the Government must

establish that the defendant made the false statement “with respect to the

information required by this chapter to be kept in the records of a person licensed

under this chapter.”      18 U.S.C. § 924(a)(1)(A).    In § 922(a)(6), there is no

requirement that the false statement be about information that the federally

licensed dealer is required to retain in his records. Thus, § 924(a)(1)(A) requires

proof of a fact that § 922(a)(6) does not.

       Under Blockburger, the two counts are distinct and are not multiplicitous.

III.   CONCLUSION

       The Court DENIES the Defendant‟s Motion to Dismiss the Superseding

Indictment (Docket # 76) and the Defendant‟s Motion to Dismiss Count III of the

Superseding Indictment for Speedy Trial Violation and to Dismiss Count II as

Being Multiplicious (Docket # 77).

       SO ORDERED.



                                  /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                  JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                  CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 12th day of September, 2011



                                             17
