                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                    DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )
                                )
             v.                 )   Cr. No. 06-10416-MLW
                                )
ARNOLD ANDREWS,                 )
     Defendant.                 )

                       MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

WOLF, D.J.                                           March 8, 2012

     This memorandum is based on the transcript of the decision

rendered orally on December 20, 2011, in which the court allowed

the defendant's motion to suppress and motion to amend the motion

to suppress. This memorandum adds some citations, clarifies some

language, and refines some discussion.

I. SUMMARY

     I have reached the following conclusions concerning defendant

Arnold Andrews' original motion to suppress and request to amend

that motion.

     The search warrant for 452 Kempton Street, New Bedford,

Massachusetts, was validly issued. Andrews had a Fourth Amendment

interest in that property. Pursuant to Michigan v. Summers, 452

U.S. 692 (1981), Andrews' Fourth Amendment rights were not violated

by his detention in connection with the search. Therefore, his

statements at 452 Kempton Street are not subject to suppression for

a Fourth Amendment violation. However, the government has not

satisfied its burden of proving that the defendant's statements at


                                1
452 Kempton Street, made after guns were found, were voluntary.

Therefore,      the   motion    to   suppress    those   statements      is   being

allowed,       and    the    statements    are   being    excluded     from      the

government's case-in-chief because the defendant's Fifth Amendment

rights were violated.

     Finally, I am also allowing the defendant's untimely motion to

amend the motion to suppress because I find that the suppression

motion    is    meritorious,     and   defense      counsel    might   be     deemed

ineffective if the plain view issue was not raised and decided in

these proceedings. Therefore, there is good cause to permit the

late filing concerning the plain view issue. With regard to the

merits, I find that the government has not proven that the plain

view exception to the warrant requirement justified the seizure of

certain    documents        during   the   search   of   452   Kempton      Street.

Therefore, those documents are also being excluded.

II. THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS ANDREWS' STATEMENTS

     A. The Fourth Amendment

     With regard to the Fourth Amendment issues, I find that

Andrews had a Fourth Amendment interest in the apartment at 452

Kempton Street, New Bedford, Massachusetts, on September 7, 2006.

His September 27, 2007 affidavit in support of the motion to

suppress states that he had lived there, that he still had a key,

that he could come and go whenever he wanted, and that he stored

certain items, like clothes, at 452 Kempton Street. Therefore,


                                           2
Andrews had a Fourth Amendment interest in the apartment and can

seek suppression of the evidence seized there. See, e.g., United

States v. Aguirre, 839 F.2d 854, 856-57 (1st Cir. 1988); United

State v. Gomez, 770 F.2d 251, 254-55 (1st Cir. 1985).

          1. Validity of Search Warrant

     Contrary to the defendant's contention, I find that the search

warrant was valid. The court reviews the validity of the warrant by

examining whether there was a substantial basis for the magistrate

judge's decision that there was probable cause for its issuance.

See United States v. Dessesaure, 429 F.3d 359, 368 n.8 (1st Cir.

2005). I find that, in this case, there was. The affidavit was

based, in part, on information from a confidential informant. It

provided the magistrate the information necessary to allow him to

assess the informant's credibility. It stated that the New Bedford

Police Department (the "NBPD") knew the informant. It disclosed his

criminal record. It stated that the informant had previously

provided information that led to an arrest and seizure of firearms

and narcotics.

     The affidavit provided the informant's description of the

apartment, based on his personal knowledge. It also described

firearms that the informant said he saw Andrews possess, at the

apartment, within the preceding 72 hours. This was first-hand

information linking illegal activity to the place to be searched,

because Andrews was a felon and, under federal law, could not


                                3
lawfully possess a firearm. See United States v. Barnard, 299 F.3d

90, 94 (1st Cir. 2002) (finding that the "first-hand details"

provided by confidential informant about defendant's house and the

types of guns possessed by defendant "provide some assurance of

reliability"); United States v. Taylor, 985 F.2d 3, 6 (1st Cir.

1993)    ("[T]he   affidavit    may   disclose      an   adequate   basis   for

evaluating the informant's veracity through the very specificity

and   detail   with   which    it   relates   the   informant's     first-hand

description of the place to be searched or the items to be seized."

(emphasis original)). In addition, as the affidavit stated, Andrews

did not have a Firearm Identification Card ("FID card").

        The informant described Andrews and there was information in

the NBPD file that supported the conclusion that the person

described was Andrews. The NBPD found that Andrews had prior

firearms and narcotics convictions. Therefore, there was probable

cause to support the issuance of a warrant. In addition, the

officers were entitled to rely on it in good faith. See United

States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 926 (1984).

             2. Seizure of Andrews

        I also find that the seizure of Andrews did not violate his

Fourth Amendment rights.

                   (a) Legal Standards

        The Fourth Amendment requires that any search or seizure be

reasonable. See U.S. Const. amend. IV; Michigan v. Fisher, 130 S.


                                       4
Ct. 546, 548 (2009). A warrant is usually required to make a

seizure   reasonable   and    warrantless          searches    and   seizures   are

presumptively   unreasonable.         See    id.    However,    there   are     some

exceptions to the warrant requirement. Summers, supra, provides the

exception to the warrant requirement that is relevant in this case.

     Summers involved a warrant for contraband, not for mere

evidence of a crime. See 452 U.S. at 705, nn.20, 21; Leveto v.

Lapina, 256 F.3d 156, 168 (3d Cir. 2001) (Alito, J.) (noting that

the Summers Court did not decide whether the rule that "a warrant

to search for contraband founded on probable cause implicitly

carries with it the limited authority to detain the occupants of

the premises while a proper search is conducted" applies if the

warrant   authorizes   a     search    for    mere     evidence,     rather     than

contraband). In Summers, the Supreme Court held that it might be

reasonable to detain an occupant leaving the place to be searched

in order to serve certain law enforcement interests. See 452 U.S.

at 699-700. These interests include: (1) preventing the flight of

a suspect; (2) protecting officers' safety; and (3) facilitating an

orderly search. Id. at 702-703. The Supreme Court also specifically

noted that a Summers detention was not likely to be exploited by

the police officers to gain incriminating information. Id. at 701.

     Therefore, the Supreme Court held in Summers that, for Fourth

Amendment purposes, a warrant to search for contraband, founded on

probable cause, implicitly provides the limited authority to detain


                                        5
the occupants of the premises while a proper search is conducted.

Id. at 705. The Court did not decide whether this rule would apply

if the warrant authorized only a search for evidence rather than

contraband, if the detention was prolonged, or if other special

circumstances existed. Id. at 705 nn.20, 21; see also Leveto, 256

F.3d at 168 (noting these limitations on the Summers rule).

      The Supreme Court amplified Summers in Muehler v. Mena, 544

U.S. 93 (2005). There, the Court stated that, "[a]n officer's

authority to detain incident to a search is categorical." Id. at

98.   The   Court   also   found   that   the   government's   interest   in

detaining and handcuffing an occupant is at its maximum when              the

warrant authorizes the search for weapons possessed by a suspected

gang member, which is the situation in the instant case. Id. at

100. However, the Court also noted that the circumstances of a

lawful detention, such as its extended duration, could cause the

detention to become unreasonable. Id.

      The Supreme Court again addressed a Summers detention in Los

Angeles County, California v. Rettele, 550 U.S. 609 (2007). The

Court wrote that, "[t]he test of reasonableness under the Fourth

Amendment is an objective one." Id. at 614. It reiterated, however,

that "special circumstances," such as "a prolonged detention,"

might render a Summers seizure unreasonable. Id. at 615.

      The holding in Rettele that the Summers test is one of

objective reasonableness is consistent with the Supreme Court's


                                      6
decision in Brigham City, Utah v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398 (2006). In

Brigham   City,    the   Supreme   Court     held   that   "[a]n    action   is

reasonable under the Fourth Amendment regardless of the individual

officer's state of mind as long as the circumstances, viewed

objectively,      justify   the    action.    The    officer's      subjective

motivation is irrelevant." Id. at 404 (emphasis original) (internal

citations omitted). Brigham City also explicitly distinguished

administrative searches, stating:

     As respondents note, we have held in the context of
     programmatic searches conducted without individualized
     suspicion - such as checkpoints that combat drunk driving
     or drug trafficking - that an inquiry into programmatic
     purpose is sometimes appropriate . . . . But this inquiry
     is directed at ensuring that the purpose behind the
     program is not ultimately indistinguishable from the
     general interest in crime control. It has nothing to do
     with discerning what is in the mind of the individual
     officer conducting the search.

Id. at 405 (internal quotations and citations omitted).

     In   2009,    the   Supreme   Court   again    held   that    warrantless

searches and seizures are generally to be evaluated for objective

reasonableness. In Michigan v. Fisher, the Court held that:

     The emergency aid exception [to the warrant requirement]
     does not depend on the officer's subjective intent or the
     seriousness of any crime they are investigating when the
     emergency arises. It requires only an objectively
     reasonable basis for believing that a person within the
     house is in need of immediate aid.

130 S. Ct. at 548 (internal quotations and citations omitted).

     Therefore, in the foregoing cases, the Supreme Court answered

the question left open in Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 813


                                      7
(1996), of whether a balancing test in which the subjective motives

of officers are weighed, rather than an objective reasonableness

test, is applicable to warrantless searches and seizures based on

less than probable cause. The Court has held that objective

reasonableness is the proper test.

     The First Circuit precedents concerning Terry stops, which are

a form of detentions based on less than probable cause, reflect the

understanding that warrantless searches and seizures based on less

than probable cause must be judged objectively, without regard to

subjective motives. For example, the First Circuit wrote in Bolton

v. Taylor that, "[w]hether a reasonable suspicion exists is treated

as an objective inquiry; the actual motive or thought process of

the officer is not plumbed." 367 F.3d 5, 7 (1st Cir. 2004).

Similarly, in United States v. Ruidiaz, the First Circuit wrote

that, "[r]easonableness in this context is a construct that must be

judged according to objective criteria; it is not dependent on an

individual officer's subjective motives." 529 F.3d 25, 29 (1st Cir.

2008).

     As the Tenth Circuit has explained, objective reasonableness

is a lower standard than probable cause. For example, in United

States v. Porter, the Tenth Circuit wrote, in addressing the

emergency aid exception to the warrant requirement, that:

     [The] test is twofold, whether (1) the officers have an
     objectively reasonable basis to believe there is "medical
     assistance needed . . . . or persons are in danger"; and
     (2) "the manner and scope of the search is reasonable" .

                                8
      . . . Reasonable belief does not require absolute
      certainty. The standard is more lenient than the probable
      cause standard.

594 F.3d 1251, 1258 (10th Cir. 2010) (internal citations omitted).

Similarly, in United States v. Najar, the Tenth Circuit, again

addressing the emergency aid exception, explained that in Brigham

City the Supreme Court rejected the previous requirement of "some

reasonable basis, approaching probable cause" to associate the

emergency with the place to be searched. 451 F.3d 710, 718 (10th

Cir. 2006). It wrote:

      Neither did the Court require probable cause in this type
      of exigent circumstances. Thus, our test is now twofold,
      whether (1) the officers have an objectively reasonable
      basis to believe there is an immediate need to protect
      the lives or safety of themselves or others, and (2) the
      manner and scope of the search is reasonable.

Id.

      Therefore, the proper test for determining whether a Summers

detention was permissible in the instant case is whether, based on

the proven facts and circumstances, the detention was objectively

reasonable, and the officers' subjective intent should not be

considered. If there is not an objectively reasonable basis for

finding the existence of any of the law enforcement interests that

justify the Summers exception to the warrant requirement, the

exception does not apply. This is essentially the reasoning of

United States v. Edwards, 103 F.3d 90 (10th Cir. 1996), a case

decided in 1996 by the Tenth Circuit before the Supreme Court

decided Mena, Rettele, and Brigham City.

                                 9
     As several courts have held, if there is an objectively

reasonable basis for finding that one or more of the Summers law

enforcement interests exist, the fact that, in contrast to Summers,

the person was not detained as he left the premises to be searched,

does not render his seizure unreasonable. See, e.g., United States

v. Cochran, 939 F.2d 337, 338 (6th Cir. 1991); United States v.

Head, 216 F. App'x 543, 546 (6th Cir. 2007); United States v.

Cavazos, 288 F.3d 706, 712 (5th Cir. 2002).

               (b) The Facts Relating to the Seizure of Andrews

     A warrant was issued that authorized a search for "[a]ny and

all firearms, ammunition, and ballistic related items. To include

a .357 chrome revolver and a 22 caliber chrome handgun." Ex. 4. It

authorized this search to occur at "452 Kempton Street in New

Bedford, Massachusetts," and stated that the apartment at 452

Kempton Street "is occupied by and/or in the possession of Arnold

Andrews." Id. It also authorized the search for firearms "on the

person or in the possession of Same as Above," evidently referring

to Andrews, the only person named in the warrant. Id. The warrant

further stated that, "[y]ou are also commanded to search any person

present who may be found to have such property in his or her

possession or under his or her control or to whom such property may

have been delivered." Id.

     The search warrant was executed on September 7, 2006, by

officers of the NBPD and agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,


                                10
Firearms, and Explosives (the "ATF"). During the preceding month,

one officer, then-NBPD Sergeant Paul Oliveira, had observed Andrews

exiting the apartment at 452 Kempton Street on at least one

occasion. NBPD Officer David Brown had also seen Andrews entering

and exiting the apartment on at least one other occasion.

     Sometime   before   2:00   p.m.   on   September   7,   2006,   NBPD

Detectives Tyrone Jones and Kurt Dreher began surveillance of the

apartment. Pursuant to standard policy, it was their intention to

wait for Andrews to come to the apartment before executing the

search warrant. They were parked in a lot approximately 50 yards

from the apartment's front door. Within the United Front Project,

the apartment is located in Building J. There are no spaces between

the units in Building J, but each unit has its own front and rear

entrance. From where Jones and Dreher were conducting surveillance,

they could not see the rear of Building J. Therefore, they could

not tell if a person emerging from behind Building J had exited a

particular unit or whether the person had exited Building J at all.

     Shortly after beginning surveillance, Jones observed Andrews

emerge from behind Building J and enter a red car. Jones lost sight

of the car, but was informed by radio that other NBPD officers had

observed the car circle the block and let Andrews out on Chancery

Street. Jones then observed Andrews return on foot to the front of

Building J, converse briefly with several other men, separate from

those men, and walk behind Building J. Jones and Dreher continued


                                  11
their surveillance until about 5:00 p.m., at which point they

learned that Andrews had been detained by other officers. At no

time on September 7, 2006, did Jones, Dreher, or any other NBPD or

ATF officer observe Andrews enter or exit the apartment at 452

Kempton Street before Andrews was handcuffed and transported there

by the officers.

     While Jones and Dreher were conducting surveillance, at about

3:00 p.m., NBPD officers and ATF agents held an operations meeting

in preparation for the execution of the search warrant. Their plan

was to locate and detain Andrews away from the apartment before

executing the search warrant. This plan was consistent with the

NBPD's standard practice of seizing the target of a search warrant

prior to executing the search, transporting the target to the

premises to be searched, and keeping the target there for the

duration of the search. One reason for this practice was the desire

to attempt to question the target during the search, particularly

if contraband was found. The officers, generally and in this case,

hoped that the target would make an inculpatory statement linking

himself to any contraband found.

     There were, however, other reasons for the practice of waiting

to detain the target, in this case Andrews, before executing the

warrant or starting the search. One such purpose was protecting

officer safety. The practice of the NBPD, employed by it and the

ATF in this case, was intended, in part, to assure that the


                                12
defendant was not in an apartment where they had probable cause to

believe there was a gun.

     In addition, pursuant to their usual practice, the officers

wanted to detain Andrews to ask if there was anyone else in the

apartment, whether there were dogs in the apartment, and whether

Andrews had a key which could facilitate the search. Facilitating

the search was another purpose for the NBPD's general practice,

which it followed in this case. More specifically, the officers

wanted to ask Andrews if he had a key, which would facilitate

getting into the apartment. The officers also wanted to ask Andrews

if there were drugs or guns in the apartment, hoping that Andrews

would make statements that would help them find contraband that

might be hidden in the apartment and link him to it. Protecting

officer safety and facilitating a search are two legitimate law

enforcement purposes under Summers. See 452 U.S. at         702-703.     It

has been proven that these purposes existed in this case.

     Some   time   after   the   operations   meeting,   Brown   and   NBPD

Detective Danny Amaral, having been dispatched to the corner of

Cedar and Elm Streets, and having subsequently been relocated to a

surveillance point closer to the 452 Kempton Street apartment,

observed Andrews in a parking lot behind the apartment. Andrews was

approximately half a block away from the rear of the apartment.

Brown estimated that a person could run that distance in less than

30 seconds. Amaral and Brown entered their vehicle, circled the


                                    13
block to enter the lot where they had observed Andrews, and

observed him leaning on a car in the company of a man and a woman.

The woman, later identified as Lizette Rivera, was in Andrews'

arms. The officers did not detain or demand identification from

either Rivera or the man, who remains unidentified. The officers

were not concerned that Rivera or the unidentified man would

interfere with the execution of the search warrant.

      No   arrest    warrant   for   Andrews     was   sought    prior   to    the

execution of the search warrant because there was not probable

cause to arrest Andrews. However, when Amaral and Brown encountered

Andrews, they informed him either that they "had a warrant for him

and the apartment," Dec. 6, 2010 Tr. at 247, or that they "had a

search warrant for him and his house," id. at 235, or that they

"had a warrant for his arrest," Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 28. Amaral and

Brown then handcuffed and pat-frisked Andrews for weapons. Amaral

read Andrews his Miranda rights. Amaral then asked Andrews whether

anybody was present in the apartment. Andrews replied that he did

not live there, and that he had lived at 154 Eugenia Street for

approximately one year. Andrews informed Amaral that the apartment

at   452   Kempton   Street    was   currently    vacant   and    had    not   had

electricity for approximately three weeks. Andrews also informed

Amaral and Brown that he did not have keys to the apartment. Amaral

then radioed this information to the other officers involved in

executing the search warrant.


                                       14
      The search warrant was not executed until Andrews had been

taken into custody. Amaral and Brown promptly transported Andrews

to the apartment. He was brought inside, where the search was

already under way. Jones testified that he believed the apartment

appeared "lived-in." Dec. 6, 2010 Tr. at 162. It was furnished and

contained photographs and clothes. There were fast food wrappers in

the kitchen. A prompt search of Andrews' pockets led to the

discovery of a cell phone, keys, and a marijuana cigarette or

blunt. The marijuana was found within 10 to 15 minutes of Andrews'

initial detention.

      Andrews was then seated at a dining room table with his hands

cuffed behind him. He remained in that position for the duration of

the search. While seated and handcuffed, Andrews was shown a copy

of the search warrant and read his Miranda rights. He stated that

he   understood   those   rights.   At   some   point   he   said   that   the

handcuffs were bothering him and they were loosened.

                  (c) Analysis of the Fourth Amendment Issue

      I find that the warrant in this case did not permit a general

search of the defendant away from the premises, 452 Kempton Street,

although the pat-frisk of him was reasonable. The Massachusetts

Supreme Judicial Court decision in Commonwealth v. Santiago, 410

Mass. 737, 741-742 (1991), and Professor LaFave indicate that, in

the context of the language in the search warrant in this case, the

officers were authorized by the warrant to search Andrews only at


                                    15
452 Kempton Street. See 2 LaFave, Search and Seizure, §4.9(a)

("Sometimes   the   search   warrant    which   is   being   executed   will

describe not only certain premises but also a person. There is no

inherent defect in a single warrant which authorizes the search of

a place and also a person, and thus a search of the named person

when he is found at the place will be a valid search under the

warrant.").

     The warrant was for contraband, not for mere evidence of a

crime. Andrews was a felon and known to be a felon. It was a

federal crime for him to possess a gun. See 18 U.S.C. §922(g). In

addition, he did not have an FID card. See M.G.L. c. 140, §129C.

The search for guns at 452 Kempton Street was a search for

contraband in the circumstances of this case.

     It was objectively reasonable for the police officers to wait

for Andrews to return before they executed the search warrant. They

did not have the full manpower to conduct the search until about

the time Andrews returned. Moreover, waiting for Andrews to return

to the area of the apartment allowed the police officers to assure

that he was not in the apartment, possibly with guns, which would

have posed a danger to them. Waiting provided the police officers

the opportunity to ask the defendant for keys to enter, which would

have facilitated the search. Waiting for Andrews to return also

assured that he would not return to the vicinity of the apartment,

see that the search was in progress, and flee.


                                   16
     It was also objectively reasonable, under the circumstances,

for the officers in the parking lot to frisk Andrews quickly for

weapons in order to protect their own safety. See, e.g., Ruidiaz,

529 F.3d at 33 ("Once an officer has formed a reasonable belief

that a detained person may be armed and dangerous, a pat-down for

protective purposes is, without more, deemed reasonably related in

scope to the stop."). In addition, it was objectively reasonable to

bring Andrews back to the apartment. Doing so promoted officer

safety. The officers did not have probable cause to arrest Andrews

in the parking lot. They had good reason to believe that a crowd

would gather once the search started, and, in fact, a crowd did

gather. It was safer for the police officers to have Andrews inside

than out in the parking lot.

     It was also objectively reasonable to bring Andrews to the

apartment to provide an opportunity for him to facilitate the

search by identifying where the guns could be found. It has also

been proven that another important reason for returning Andrews to

the apartment was the officers' desire to question him in the hope

that he would say something incriminating. However, as explained

earlier,   it   is   not   permissible   for   the   court   to   weigh   this

subjective motive in deciding the objective reasonableness of the

police officers' conduct. See Rettele, 550 U.S. at 615 ("The test

of reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment is an objective

one."); Brigham City, 547 U.S. at 405 ("An action is 'reasonable'


                                    17
under the Fourth Amendment regardless of the individual officer's

state of mind as long as the circumstances, viewed objectively,

justify   [the]   action.     The   officer's    subjective      motivation    is

irrelevant.")     (emphasis     original)       (internal     quotations      and

citations omitted).

       The conduct in the apartment was also objectively reasonable.

Handcuffing the defendant promoted officer safety. The cuffs were

loosened when Andrews said he was uncomfortable. There was also the

potential for Andrews to provide information to facilitate the

search. This case, therefore, contrasts with Edwards, where the

defendant was kept on the sidewalk and could not, therefore, have

facilitated the search. See 103 F.3d at 91.

       Once in the apartment, Andrews was promptly searched. A

marijuana blunt was found during that search, within ten minutes of

the    time   Andrews   was   first     detained.   As    the    parties    each

acknowledge, finding the marijuana provided a basis for the police

officers to arrest the defendant pursuant to Massachusetts General

Law, Chapter 94C, §§34 and 41C.

       It was also objectively reasonable for the officers not to

take    Andrews   to    the   station    immediately     after    finding     the

marijuana. Doing so would have diluted the manpower they had to

secure the site and conduct the search. This, however, was not

their actual motive. Their actual, primary motive was to try to

prompt the defendant to make incriminating statements if firearms


                                        18
or other contraband were found.

     The detention at the apartment was not unreasonably long. The

firearms were found in a bedroom within 10 to 20 minutes of

Andrews'   detention.   As   explained   below,   the   defendant   was

questioned in a manner that violated the Fifth Amendment and then

taken to the police station.

     Cases consistent with this court's decision that Andrews'

Fourth Amendment rights were not violated include Cochran, 939 F.2d

at 338; United States v. Sanchez, 555 F.3d 910, 918 (10th Cir.

2009); Head, 216 Fed App'x at 546; United States v. Sears, 139 F.

App'x 162, 166 (11th Cir. 2005); Cavazos, 288 F.3d at 712; and

United States v. Harris, No. Cr. 02-10240-GAO, 2004 WL 912809 at *1

(D. Mass. Apr. 26, 2004).

     In essence, the detention would have been unreasonable if no

Summers objectives or law enforcement interests existed. Edwards is

essentially a case in which no such interests were proven. See 103

F.3d at 91. United States v. Reinholz is another such case. See 245

F.3d 765, 778 (8th Cir. 2001).

     It is possible that the Eighth Circuit's decision in United

States v. Sherrill, 27 F.3d 344, 346 (8th Cir. 1994), is not

consistent with the standards I have applied. However, Sherrill was

decided in 1994, before the Supreme Court's decisions in Mena

(2005) and Rettele (2007). In any event, to the extent that

Sherrill is inconsistent with my reasoning, I respectfully do not


                                  19
find it persuasive.

     B. The Fifth Amendment

     The defendant's motion to suppress based on the contention

that the defendant's statements were involuntary and, therefore,

resulted   from   a   violation   of    his   Fifth   Amendment   rights   is

meritorious. Accordingly, the statements are being excluded from

the government's case-in-chief. See Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298,

307 (1985). They may be used on cross-examination to impeach the

defendant. Id.

           1. Legal Standards

     The generally applicable standards concerning the alleged

violation of Miranda rights are described in detail in my decision

in United States v. Gonzalez, 719 F. Supp. 2d 167, 170-174 (D.

Mass. 2010). Of decisive importance in this case is the principle

that the government bears the burden of proof concerning a motion

to suppress statements that a defendant asserts were made in

violation of his Miranda rights. The knowing, intelligent, and

voluntary waiver of those rights must be proven by a preponderance

of the evidence. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 475 (1966);

Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U.S. 157, 168 (1986); Berghuis v.

Thompkins, 130 S. Ct. 2250, 2261 (2010).

           2. Analysis of the Fifth Amendment Issue

     The government has proven that the defendant knew of his

Miranda rights. It is admittedly a close question whether it has


                                       20
been proven that Andrews voluntarily decided to waive his right to

remain silent and confess that the guns found at 452 Kempton Street

were his. However, I am not persuaded that it is more likely than

not that the defendant provided that information voluntarily.

Therefore, the government has not satisfied its burden of proof.

Thus, the statements acknowledging that the guns found belonged to

Andrews must be excluded from the government's case-in-chief. See

Elstad, 470 U.S. at 307.

     The government has proven that the defendant was informed of

his Miranda rights and understood them. The defendant was given his

Miranda rights twice – first when he was detained in the parking

lot and again when he was brought into the apartment. In the

apartment, the defendant stated that he understood his Miranda

rights. Significantly, the defendant refused to answer questions

initially, even after the guns were found. This indicates that the

defendant understood that he had a right to remain silent.

     The government has not proven, however, that the defendant's

waiver of his right to remain silent was, as the Supreme Court said

in Moran v. Burbine, "voluntary in the sense that it was the

product of a free and deliberate choice rather than intimidation,

coercion, or deception." 475 U.S. 412, 421 (1986). As the First

Circuit has reiterated after Moran, "[t]he voluntariness of an

admission depends on whether the will of the defendant [was]

overborne so that the statement was not his free and voluntary act,


                                21
and that question [is] to be resolved in light of the totality of

the circumstances." United States v. Jackson, 918 F.2d 236, 241

(1st Cir. 1990) (internal quotations and citations omitted).

     A waiver of Miranda rights is not involuntary unless it

involved   coercion   by   the   government   because   "[a]bsent   police

conduct causally related to the confession, there is simply no

basis for concluding that any state actor has deprived a criminal

defendant of due process of law." Connelly, 479 U.S. at 164.

Therefore:

     A defendant's mental state or condition, by itself and
     apart from its relationship to official coercion, is
     never dispositive of the inquiry into constitutional
     voluntariness . . . . Rather, the voluntariness of a
     waiver of [the Fifth Amendment] privilege has always
     depended on the absence of overreaching, not on free
     choice in any broader sense of the word.

United States v. Rojas-Tapia, 446 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2006)

(internal quotations and citations omitted).

     There are some relevant circumstances that weigh in favor of

a finding that the defendant's waiver of his right to remain silent

was voluntary. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 226 (1973),

provides examples of relevant circumstances, some of which exist

here. Before making the statements at issue, the defendant was read

his Miranda rights twice and he understood them. He had also been

arrested before, though there is no evidence as to whether he was

read his rights, understood them, and/or exercised them on those

occasions. The defendant was, however, in a familiar place, the


                                    22
kitchen of 452 Kempton Street. While there were many officers in

the   apartment,   only   one,   ATF    Special   Agent   Scott   Heagney,

questioned him. Although handcuffed, the cuffs were loosened at the

defendant's request. The officers did not abuse the defendant

physically or verbally. The statements at issue were made within

about 30 minutes of the defendant's detention. Until Heagney

threatened to arrest the defendant's mother, the defendant was not

crying or visibly upset, though Heagney said he looked nervous and

concerned. Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 115. Another officer said he looked

calm. Dec. 6, 2010 Tr. at 161.

      However, there are other facts that cause me to conclude that

the government has not proven that the statements the defendant

made after the guns were found in a room at 452 Kempton Street were

voluntary. These facts are as follows.

      A primary purpose for bringing the defendant to 452 Kempton

Street was to prompt him to make incriminating statements if, as

expected, guns were found. In essence, the law enforcement officers

exploited a detention that was objectively reasonable under Summers

for a purpose that the Supreme Court did not intend to authorize or

encourage. See Summers, 452 U.S. at 701. While the officers' intent

is not critical, the impact of what they did is significant, and

their intent is relevant to the factual findings concerning what

they did.

      Heagney told Andrews, who was then 22 years old, that he could


                                   23
be prosecuted in federal court and go to jail for the rest of his

life if he did not admit that the guns were his. This description

of the potential penalty was false and was known to be false by

Heagney. However, the falsity of the threat was not evident to the

defendant, who had no prior experience with a federal prosecution.

Such distortions of the potential penalties can cause or contribute

to a finding that a statement was not made voluntarily. As the

Seventh Circuit has written,

     [i]nterrogation becomes constitutionally objectionable []
     when the circumstances prevent the person being
     questioned    from    making    a    rational     choice.
     Misrepresentations can do this, by distorting the
     alternatives among which the person under interrogation
     is being asked to choose; so can threats that prevent a
     person from thinking clearly, or that (much like
     misrepresentations) exaggerate the consequences of one of
     the alternatives - not confessing.

Weidner v. Thieret, 866 F.2d 958, 963-964 (7th Cir. 1989) (internal

citations omitted); see also United States v. Duvall, 537 F.2d 15,

25 (2d Cir. 1976) (statement that charges carried "a possible

sentence of a hundred years," when prosecutor knew no judge would

impose,   and       no     prosecutor    would   seek,     a    sentence      remotely

approaching     a    hundred     years,    was   coercive;          court    suppressed

statements made by defendant in response).

     Heagney        also    falsely     indicated   that       he    would    help   the

defendant avoid spending the rest of his life in prison if the

defendant admitted that the guns were his. Heagney had no intention

of trying to have the defendant rewarded if he promptly confessed


                                          24
and, in fact, he did not do so. See Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 76-77, 125-

27. This is a form of deceit that the Supreme Court noted in Moran

can contribute to undermining the voluntariness of a confession.

See 475 U.S. at 421; see also United States v. Lopez, 437 F.3d

1059, 1065 (10th Cir. 2006) ("Under Supreme Court and Tenth Circuit

precedent, a promise of leniency is relevant to determining whether

a confession was involuntary and, depending on the circumstances,

may render a confession coerced."; distinguishing "vague" promises

from promises to make cooperation known to the U.S. Attorney or

Judge).

       Nevertheless, the false threat of a life sentence, and the

false promise of assistance in avoiding it, did not cause the

defendant to admit the guns were his. See Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 129.

Rather, the defendant did not confess to possessing the guns until

Heagney falsely threatened to arrest the defendant's mother for

possessing the guns. Id. at 130. Andrews' mother was elderly, and

ill with lupus and fibromyalgia. Id. at 209. Andrews was very close

to his mother. Id. After the search began, his mother and several

other people came to 452 Kempton Street. Heagney and the defendant

could hear Andrews' mother crying throughout the search. Id. at

133.

       After the guns were found, Heagney told the defendant that he

should "stop disrespecting his mother." Id. at 77-78, 133. Heagney

said, "[t]he guns are either yours or your mother's or your


                                 25
sister's." Id. at 135-36. Heagney intended to cause Andrews to

believe that he would arrest Andrews' mother if Andrews did not

admit that the guns were his. However, Heagney was not then aware

of any basis for arresting Andrews' mother and had no intention of

doing so. Id. at 137-41. Nor did his colleagues believe that they

had a basis to arrest Andrews' mother, even though one of them,

Jones, knew that she did not have an FID card. Id. at 137; Dec. 6,

2010 Tr. at 206. While standing outside with the defendant's

mother, Oliveira asked her if there were drugs and guns in the

house that belonged to her, and she answered, "[o]f course not."

Dec. 6, 2010 Tr. at 122-23.

     Based on the totality of all of the known circumstances,

including   the   informant's   report   that   the   guns   were   the

defendant's, no prudent person would have believed that Andrews'

elderly, ill mother possessed those guns, which were found hidden

in a closet in a bedroom that the officers, at that time, had no

information indicating had been her bedroom. Therefore, there was

not, in any event, probable cause to arrest Andrews' mother, and

Heagney knew this. See United States v. Fiasconaro, 315 F.3d 28,

34-35 (1st Cir. 2002) ("Probable cause exists when the facts and

circumstances within [the police officers'] knowledge and of which

they had reasonably trustworthy information were sufficient to

warrant a prudent [person] in believing that the [defendant] had

committed or was committing an offense." (internal quotations and


                                 26
citations omitted)).

     However, the false threat to arrest Andrews' mother had the

effect Heagney intended. Andrews immediately said: "Arrest me, not

my mother." "Those guns are mine." Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 77, 80, 136.

Heagney testified that, as Andrews said this, "he bowed his head a

little bit, like he had been defeated." Id. at 77. Soon after

making these statements, the defendant began to cry, which was

extremely unusual for him. Id. at 206-08; 232-33; Dec. 6, 2010 Tr.

at 121. When his mother and others came in, the defendant said to

his sister, "They threatened to arrest Mommy," or words to that

effect. Dec. 8, 2010 Tr. at 208.

     Once he was at the police station and his mother was no longer

threatened   with   arrest,   Andrews   refused   to   make   any   further

statements. Dec. 6, 2010 Tr. at 167.

     As the First Circuit has written: "Certainly some types of

police trickery can entail coercion: consider a confession obtained

because the police falsely threatened to take a suspect's child

away from her if she did not cooperate." United States v. Byram,

145 F.3d 405, 408 (1st Cir. 1998) (citing Lynumn v. Illinois, 372

U.S. 528, 534 (1963) (threats made to suspect that her children's

state financial aid would be cut off and her children taken from

her if she did not "cooperate" held to be coercive, rendering the

confession involuntary); Spano v. New York, 360 U.S. 315, 323

(1959) (causing petitioner's friend to tell him that petitioner had


                                   27
gotten him into trouble, jeopardized his job, and that the loss of

his job would be disastrous to his three children, wife, and unborn

child    was   coercive;   court   found   that   petitioner's   "will   was

overborne" and his confession was involuntary)).

        The coercive police conduct in this case is not as extreme as

the coercive conduct in Lynumn or Spano. See Lynumn, 372 U.S. at

534; Spano, 360 U.S. at 323. However, the instant case is also

distinguishable from the key cases on which the government relies.

For example, in Jackson, this court's decision was affirmed by the

First Circuit, which found that an admission made by the defendant

was voluntary where he was truthfully told that his sister was

under arrest. See 918 F.3d at 243. In Jackson, there was no proof

of any threats or promises made to the defendant, and there was no

evidence that the defendant was especially close to his sister or

cared about what happened to her. Id. Similarly, in United States

v. Charley, there was no evidence of threats. See No. Cr. 03-10387-

DPW, 2004 WL 2851947 at *6-8 (D. Mass. Dec. 9, 2004). There, the

police offered not to press charges against the defendant's brother

and friends if the defendant admitted that the gun found in his car

belonged to him. Id. There was no evidence that the defendant was

especially close to his brother, and the defendant admitted some,

but not all of the relevant facts, indicating that his will was not

overborne. Id.

        The instant case is more analogous to United States v. Finch,


                                     28
998 F.2d 349, 355-356 (6th Cir. 1993). In Finch, the Sixth Circuit

found   the    defendant's     statements       involuntary    when    the   police

officers executing a search warrant threatened to arrest the

defendant's mother and girlfriend, without probable cause, if they

found cocaine on the premises. Id. The fact that there was no legal

basis for the threat contributed to the conclusion that the

confession was involuntary. Id. Subsequently, in United States v.

Ivy, the Sixth Circuit held that a defendant's consent to search

his home was coerced and involuntary when, among other things, the

police threatened that if the defendant did not consent to the

search,   everyone      in     the   house,      including     the     defendant's

girlfriend, would go to jail and their child would be taken into

protective custody. See 165 F.3d 397, 403 (6th Cir. 1998). The

Sixth Circuit noted that, "[c]ourts have found that antagonistic

actions   by    the   police    against     a   suspect's     family    taint   the

voluntariness of any subsequent consent." Id.

     In any event, each case must be decided based on the totality

of its unique circumstances. It is a close question whether the

defendant's admission that the guns found at 452 Kempton Street

were his was voluntary. However, the government has not proven by

a preponderance of the evidence that his admissions were voluntary.

Therefore, those statements are not admissible in the government's

case-in-chief. See Elstad, 470 U.S. at 307.




                                       29
III. THE MOTION TO AMEND THE MOTION TO SUPPRESS

     The motion to amend the motion to suppress is also being

allowed. In addition, the motion to suppress the documents seized

is being allowed because the warrant did not authorize a search for

documents, and the government has not proven that the plain view

exception to the warrant requirement applies to the seizure of the

documents at issue.

     A. The Particularity Clause of the Fourth Amendment

     This   issue   implicates   the   fundamental   purpose   of   the

particularity clause of the Fourth Amendment. The Fourth Amendment

provides that "no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,

supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the

place to be searched, and the persons and things to be seized."

U.S. Const. amend. IV. The Supreme Court stated in Coolidge v. New

Hampshire that there are certain constitutional interests served by

the warrant requirement. 403 U.S. 443, 467 (1971). One purpose of

the warrant requirement is to assure that "those searches deemed

necessary should be as limited as possible." Id.

     The primary purpose of the particularity requirement of the

Fourth Amendment is to limit the discretion, and promote the

accountability, of officers executing a warrant. The Supreme Court

stated in Marron v. United States that, "[t]he requirement that

warrants shall particularly describe the things to be seized makes

general searches under them impossible and prevents the seizure of


                                  30
one thing under a warrant describing another." 275 U.S. 192, 196

(1927). The First Circuit wrote in United States v. Bonner that

"the manifest purpose of the particularity requirement of the

Fourth Amendment is to prevent wide-ranging general searches by the

police." 808 F.2d 864, 866-67 (1st Cir. 1986). As the First Circuit

later explained in United States v. Upham:

     The requirement of particularity arises out of a
     hostility to the Crown's practice of issuing "general
     warrants" taken to authorize the wholesale rummaging
     through a person's property in search of contraband or
     evidence. The cases on particularity are actually
     concerned with at least two rather different problems:
     one is whether the warrant supplies enough information to
     guide and control the agent's judgment in selecting what
     to take.

168 F.3d 532, 535 (1st Cir. 1999).

     B. Analysis

     In this case, the warrant authorized a search for "any and all

firearms, ammunition, magazines, and ballistic related items." Ex.

4. It did not state that law enforcement agents were authorized to

search for evidence of firearms crimes generally or documents

specifically. See id. Documents linking Andrews to 452 Kempton

Street were seized. These documents are subject to the amended

motion to suppress. Specifically, they are: two photographs of the

defendant (Exhibit 1 introduced on December 7, 2011); a summons to

jury duty addressed to the defendant at 452 Kempton Street (Exhibit

2); and a five page notice of recall warrant addressed to the

defendant at 452 Kempton Street (Exhibit 3).


                                31
     ATF Special Agent Robert White found the documents in the

bedroom where the guns were found. Pursuant to the NBPD's standard

operating procedure, White had not read the warrant. He was briefed

on the proposed search. He assumed that he was authorized and

directed to search for documents linking Andrews to 452 Kempton

Street, which would be evidence that the defendant possessed the

guns the officers hoped to find. This was the standard practice of

the NBPD in executing a search warrant.

     Although there is some conflicting evidence, the credible

evidence also proves the following. White was searching a bedroom

after the guns were found. There were many documents in the

bedroom. They were on and/or in a dresser. White had to move many

of the documents in order to read all of them and determine whether

they linked Andrews to 452 Kempton Street. He did so. White seized

the documents that seemed to link Andrews to that address and threw

the rest of them on the floor, as illustrated by Exhibit 4E.

     The government has not proven that the documents seized could

be seen by White when he began reading the documents. Rather, I

find that White had to move many documents before he found the few

that he seized. White did not find the documents at issue as part

of a search for guns, firearms, or other items described in the

warrant. He did not look through the many papers searching for

hidden ammunition. Rather, his examination of the papers was

separate and apart from the search for guns.


                                32
      In addition, the discovery of the seized documents did not

occur inadvertently while White was searching for items specified

in the warrant. Rather, he mistakenly thought that the warrant

authorized a search for documents providing evidence of firearms

crimes and he was intentionally looking for such documents. Based

on   that   misunderstanding,      White       read    every     seized   document,

including all five pages of the recall warrant document. See Ex. 3.

      The warrant in this case does not describe documents with the

particularity    required     by   the    Fourth       Amendment.    It   does   not

expressly     authorize   a    search         for     relevant    documents.     The

government, however, argues that the documents were properly seized

under the plain view doctrine. The government has the burden of

proving that the plain view exception to the warrant requirement

applies. See United States v. Rutkowski, 877 F.2d 139, 141 (1st

Cir. 1989).

      At times, the First Circuit has described the plain view

doctrine as having two requirements or elements. For example, in

United States v. Giannetta, the First Circuit wrote:

      The plain view doctrine allows police to seize the
      object, even though it is not specified in the warrant,
      if two requirements are met. First, the police must have
      a prior justification for being in a position to see the
      item in plain view. Phrased another way, the police must
      not have exceeded the permitted scope of their search in
      uncovering the item. Second, the incriminating nature of
      the item must be immediately apparent to the seizing
      agent. "Immediately apparent" has been defined as
      probable cause to believe the item is contraband or
      evidence of a crime.


                                         33
909 F.2d 571, 578 (1st Cir. 1990). However, Giannetta                  cited

Rutkowski, which described the plain view test as follows: "The

exception applies if three criteria are met. First, the officer's

presence   at   the   point   of   discovery   must   be   lawful.   Second,

discovery of the item seized must be inadvertent. Third, the item's

evidentiary value must be immediately apparent to searchers." 877

F.2d at 140-141.

     More recently, the First Circuit wrote, in United States v.

Paneto that:

     [a] police officer, even though he does not have a search
     warrant, may seize an object in plain view as long as he
     has lawfully reached the vantage point from which he sees
     the object, has probable cause to support his seizure of
     that object, and has a right of access to the object
     itself. A challenge to a search of an object in plain
     view calls for a slightly different analytic rubric. When
     an officer seeks to manipulate an object in plain sight,
     the relevant inquiry becomes whether "the plain view
     doctrine would have sustained a seizure of the object
     itself."

661 F.3d 709, 713 (1st Cir. 2011) (citing Arizona v. Hicks, 480

U.S. 321, 326 (1987)) (some internal citations omitted).

     In this case, the warrant authorized White to be in the

bedroom to search for firearms and certain other specified items.

However, the government has not proven that the documents seized

were initially in plain view while he was looking for guns. Rather,

I find that many documents had to be moved to discover the few that

were seized, and they were not moved as part of a search for items

specified in the warrant. Instead, documents were moved and read


                                     34
under the mistaken belief that the warrant authorized a search for

documentary evidence.

     The movement of the documents was a search, as a search is

defined in Arizona v. Hicks. See 480 U.S. 321, 324-325 (1987). In

Hicks, an officer's moving of equipment to view "concealed portions

of the apartment or its contents" when the action was "unrelated to

the objectives of the authorized intrusion" was characterized as a

separate, independent "search." Id.

     In Paneto, officers saw a $20 bill lying on a table and picked

it up to examine it. See 661 F.3d at 714, n.3. The First Circuit

stated that, "[i]t is clear that the Fourth Amendment forbids

handling an item to expose something hidden" and contrasted such a

search with "moving an item merely to magnify or confirm something

already visible." Id.

     In Paneto, 661 F.3d at 714, the $20 bill at issue was

immediately visible to the naked eye and there was probable cause

to move it. In contrast, in the instant case the documents seized

were not discovered until a search, not authorized by the warrant,

of a group of documents was conducted without probable cause. In

essence,   the   officer   here   exceeded   the   scope   of   the   search

permitted by the warrant in uncovering the seized items. The First

Circuit held in Giannetta that for the plain view doctrine to

apply, "the police must not have exceeded the permitted scope of

their search in uncovering the item." 909 F.2d at 578. Therefore,


                                    35
the search that revealed the seized documents in the instant case

is not protected by the plain view exception to the warrant

requirement.

       In addition, in contrast to the $20 bill in Paneto, except for

the photographs, the incriminating nature of the seized documents

was not immediately apparent to White. Rather, he had to read all

the documents in order to conclude that there was probable cause to

believe that the few documents that he decided to seize were

evidence of a crime. This case is analogous to United States v.

Garcia, 496 F.3d 495, 510-511 (6th Cir. 2007). In Garcia, the

warrant authorized a search for cocaine, but not documents. Id. at

501. The Sixth Circuit suppressed the documents seized because the

agent had to read every document to decide whether any of them had

evidentiary value. Id. at 511. Therefore, the Sixth Circuit held

that    the   criminal   nature     of    the    seized    documents   was   not

immediately apparent. Id. In essence, the Sixth Circuit reasoned

that to apply the plain view exception to save the seizure of

documents     in   Garcia   would    "extend      a   particularized     search

authorized    by   Fourth   Amendment         principles   into   an   unlawful

exploratory search." Id. at 510.

       In Hicks, the Supreme Court wrote:

       It matters not that the search uncovered nothing of any
       great personal value to respondent - serial numbers
       rather than (what might conceivably have been hidden
       behind or under the equipment) letters or photographs. A
       search is a search, even if it happens to disclose
       nothing but the bottom of a turntable.

                                         36
480 U.S. at 325. In contrast to Hicks, this case involves the

seizure of documents at the heart of the interests protected by the

particularity clause of the Fourth Amendment. To permit those

seized documents to be introduced as evidence in this case would

abet the type of general searches that the Fourth Amendment

prohibits   and   would   seriously   erode   the   vitality   of   its

particularity clause. In any event, the government has not proven

that the plain view exception to the warrant requirement applies.

Therefore, the motion to suppress the seized documents is being

allowed.

IV. ORDER

In view of the foregoing, it is hereby ORDERED that:

     1. The Motion to Suppress Evidence (Docket No. 26) is ALLOWED.

     2. The Motion to Amend Motion to Suppress Evidence (Docket No.

107) is ALLOWED and the documents at issue are suppressed.



                                             /s/ Mark L. Wolf
                                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                 37
