                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                         DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,          )
                                   )
                  v.               )
                                   )       CRIMINAL   NO.    04-30034-PBS
MICHAEL ALAN CROOKER               )
               Defendant.          )


                           MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
                               March 5, 2012
SARIS, U.S.D.J.
                             I.   Introduction

     On June 18, 2010, the United States Court of Appeals for the

First Circuit (“First Circuit”) reversed defendant Michael Alan

Crooker’s (“Crooker”) criminal conviction for Transportation of a

Firearm in Interstate Commerce by a Convicted Felon in violation

of 18 U.S.C. §§ 921 and 922(c), based on its holding that the

silencer at issue did not qualify as a “firearm” within the

meaning of the statutory definition of 18 U.S.C. §§ 921(a)(3)(c)

and 924.    Since his acquittal, Crooker, now a prisoner serving a

federal sentence at FMC Devens in Ayer, Massachusetts (having

been transferred from FCI Raybrook), filed a number of pro se

motions, including motions relating to the return of his

property.   See motions (Docket Nos 272, 273).              The Government

filed an Opposition to his motions, and on November 30, 2011,

this Court denied Crooker’s motions and directed the Government

to return Crooker’s property in accordance with an agreement to


                                       1
be reached within 60 days with Crooker’s criminal defense counsel

in connection with CR 07-30038-DPW, unless the Government moved

for an extension of time.

     Since then, the Government has moved for extensions on

several occasions, and this Court has allowed the motions and set

a deadline of March 9, 2012.   See Electronic Order entered

February 29, 2012.

     In the meantime, Crooker filed a Motion for a Detailed

Accounting and for Compensation for Destroyed Property (Docket

No. 283).   In that motion, Crooker alleges that the Government

has lied about his property and suggests his guilty plea before

Judge Woodlock was procured by fraud.   He contends that the

Government claimed it had in its possession certain property, but

in fact, the Government has destroyed the property (such as a

vial of ricin).   He also contends the Government recently

attempted to give away some of his property to an individual in

Ohio (i.e., a Sam Yang Air Rifle and accessories).   Crooker

contends this offer was rejected by the Ohio man and therefore

the property reverts back to him and should be returned.     He

values this property (as of 2001) at $550.00 for the air rifle,

and $250.00 for the air rifle pump.

     In light of this, Crooker requests that this Court order the

Government to provide a detailed accounting, with supporting

                                 2
affidavits, as to each of the 38 categories of seized property

previously ordered returned to him.   He also seeks compensation

for any item of property that was destroyed or is otherwise not

available for return to him due to governmental action.   Finally,

he requests that the Government be ordered to serve him

personally with any filings, as he did not receive the

Government’s most recent motion for an extension of time.

     In response, the Government filed an Opposition (Docket No.

285), contending Crooker’s motion should be denied as premature,

because the property at issue is being negotiated between his

attorney, Timothy G. Watkins, Esq., and Assistant U.S. Attorney

Donald Cabell, with respect to Crooker’s case before Judge

Woodlock (CR 07-30038-DPW).   The Government represents that after

an agreement is reached, it will return Crooker’s property to his

designated representative, Peter Crooker.   The Government submits

that it has contacted Peter Crooker to prepare for the expected

return of the property.   Thus, until the property has been

returned and examined by Crooker’s designee, Crooker cannot

assert fairly that the return is incomplete.

     Next, the Government contends that it has served both

Crooker’s attorney by ECF and Crooker himself by mail, since he

is acting in a pro se capacity in this matter.




                                 3
                          II.   Discussion

     As this Court previously noted, Crooker may seek the return

of his property.   See Memorandum and Order (Docket No. 279 at 7).

Further, this Court has already stated that as soon as the

agreement between Attorney Watkins and Assistant U.S. Attorney

Cabell is finalized, the Government is ordered to return property

to Crooker’s designated representative.      See id.   Since the

agreement has not been finalized because extensions have been

granted, the Court agrees that Crooker’s request is premature.

Nevertheless, this Court finds that Crooker will be entitled to

an accounting of his property that has been returned to Peter

Crooker, along with an accounting of property that was seized by

the Government but has not been returned, as well as an

explanation of the reasons why such property was not returned to

Crooker.

     Accordingly, this Court will DENY Crooker’s Motion for a

Detailed Accounting and for Compensation for Destroyed Property

(Docket No. 283) without prejudice; however, the Court will issue

an Order directing that, after the Government has finalized the

agreement with defense counsel, and after Peter Crooker has

received all the property the Government intends to return, the

Government will be directed to provide an accounting of property

seized and returned, and an accounting of property seized but not

                                  4
returned, with an explanation why such property has not been

returned.   This accounting shall be done within 21 days after

Peter Crooker has received all the property the Government

intends to return.   The issue of compensation for unreturned

property is a matter to be addressed, if at all, at a later time.

     Finally, with respect to the issue of service of filings by

the Government on Crooker, this Court will take no action based

on the representation that it already is serving both defense

counsel and Crooker (by mail).

                         III.    Conclusion

     Based on the foregoing, it is hereby Ordered that:

1.   Crooker’s Motion for a Detailed Accounting and for
     Compensation for Destroyed Property (Docket No. 283) is
     DENIED without prejudice;

2.   Within 21 days after Peter Crooker has received all the
     property the Government intends to return, the Government
     shall provide a detailed accounting to Crooker of property
     seized and returned, and a detailed accounting of property
     seized but not returned, along with an explanation why such
     property has not been returned.


SO ORDERED.

                                      /s/ Patti B. Saris
                                      PATTI B. SARIS
                                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                  5
