                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
      v.                               )      1:11-cr-00025-JAW
                                       )
PAUL CORBIN                            )


                      ORDER DENYING DEFENDANT’S
                      MOTION FOR DISQUALIFICATION

      The Court denies a criminal defendant‟s motion to disqualify a judge based

on statements he made to a newspaper reporter about the dangers of

methamphetamine.

I.    PROCEDURAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND

      On February 24, 2011, a federal grand jury issued a three-count indictment

against Paul Corbin charging possession with intent to distribute marijuana in

violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), possession with intent to distribute 50 grams or

more of methamphetamine in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1), and possession of a

firearm by an unlawful user of scheduled drugs in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g).

Indictment (Docket # 10).

      On October 3, 2011, Mr. Corbin moved for recusal, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§

144, 455, asking that I disqualify myself from presiding on this matter. Def. Paul

Corbin’s Mot. for Disqualification, with Incorporated Mem. of Law and

Accompanying Aff., Cert. of Good Faith, and Exs. (Docket # 28) (Def.’s Mot.).

      The primary basis for Mr. Corbin‟s motion is a statement I made concerning

the risks posed by drug dealers crossing into the state of Maine from Canada
published in the Morning Sentinel, a Maine newspaper, on February 3, 2011. Def.’s

Mot. at 9.    The newspaper article was about new federal legislation enhancing

border security in Maine; it quoted a press release from Senator Susan Collins,

which confirmed her efforts to address security flaws along Maine‟s border to

combat the “growing drug-smuggling trade” between Maine and Canada. Id. at 8.

The newspaper article makes two references to me. First, the article says that I

“see[] the effects of a „porous‟ border with Canada in my Bangor courtroom,”

including “a growing number of drug-trafficking cases, particularly involving

dangerous methamphetamine.” Id. at 9. The article‟s second reference to me is:

       Woodcock said in a phone interview that he is particularly
       concerned about methamphetamine dealers coming across the
       border, saying that Maine—rural, majority white and poor—has
       „all  the     characteristics  of a   state   vulnerable      to
       methamphetamine. Once it gets here, if it does, it will be very,
       very difficult to eradicate.‟”

Id.

       A second basis is that in December 2010, the Department of Justice

distributed a United States Government Accountability Office report about border

security to all federal judges, including district court judges, which addressed

perceived issues with border security in Maine. Id. at 2, Ex. A.

       The Government responded to the recusal motion on October 24, 2011.

Gov’t’s Resp. to Def.’s Mot. to Disqualify (Docket # 33).1 The defense replied to the

Government‟s response on November 4, 2011.                Def. Paul Corbin’s Reply to the


1 The Court inadvertently issued a decision before Mr. Corbin filed his reply. When Mr. Corbin
brought this to the Court‟s attention, the Court vacated its Order. Order Denying Def.’s Mot. for
Disqualification (Docket # 35); Order Vacating Order on Mot. for Recusal (Docket # 36).

                                               2
United States’ Opp. to Def.’s Mot. for Judicial Disqualification, with Incorporated

Mem. of Law (Docket # 38) (Def.’s Reply).

II.   DISCUSSION

      Under sections 144 and 455 of Title 28 of the United States Code, a judge

may be disqualified on two possible grounds: (a) where “the judge may have a

personal bias or prejudice concerning a party” or (b) where “the judge‟s impartiality

may reasonably be questioned.” United States v. Kelley, 712 F.2d 884, 889 (1st Cir.

1983); see also 28 U.S.C. §§ 144, 455. The analysis under both sections is the same,

namely that recusal is required where a reasonable person would question the

judge‟s impartiality. Id. This “long established” test requires that the moving party

present “a factual basis for the claim that there appears to be a lack of

impartiality.” United States v. Voccola, 99 F.3d 37, 42 (1st Cir. 1996).

      Mr. Corbin‟s motion asserts that once a party files a motion and affidavit

under 28 U.S.C. § 144, “the judge has no alternative but to recuse himself, no matter

how defamatory the charges may be and even if they are known to the Court to be

false.” Def.’s Mot. at 4-5 (quoting United States v. Hanrahan, 248 F. Supp. 471

(D.D.C. 1965)) (emphasis in Defendant‟s motion). This proposition, if true, would

allow a party to force a judge‟s recusal simply by filing an affidavit under § 144,

regardless of the sufficiency of the affidavit; as such, Mr. Corbin overstates the

proper process. The First Circuit has explained that when a disqualification motion

is filed, a judge is “not required to immediately recuse himself.” Kelley, 712 F.2d at

889. Although the challenged judge “may not pass on the truth of the matters



                                            3
asserted,” he “must pass upon the legal sufficiency of the affidavit” forming the

factual basis for the party‟s disqualification motion. Id. (citing Berger v. United

States, 255 U.S. 22 (1921)).

      A.     Personal Bias

      Recusal is required “whenever there exists a genuine question concerning the

judge‟s impartiality.” Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 540, 552 (1994) (emphasis

omitted). Elaborating on this standard, the Supreme Court recently stated that the

essential inquiry “is an objective one[:] . . . not whether the judge is actually,

subjectively biased, but whether the average judge in his position is „likely‟ to be

neutral, or whether there is an unconstitutional „potential for bias.‟” Caperton v.

A.T. Massey Coal Co., Inc., 129 S. Ct. 2252, 2262 (2009) (holding that state appeals

court judge should have recused himself as a matter of due process where chief

executive officer of corporate party had contributed $3 million to judge‟s election

campaign just prior to party‟s appeal of $50 million trial judgment).

      Where the moving party challenges opinions formed by a judge during the

performance of his judicial duties, such opinions may not form the basis for

disqualification on personal bias grounds unless they exhibit a “deep-seated

favoritism or antagonism that would make fair judgment impossible.” Liteky, 510

U.S. at 555; see also Kelley, 712 F.2d at 889-90. While an opinion derived from

sources outside of judicial proceedings may sometimes be a condition for recusal on

the basis of bias or prejudice, such an “extrajudicial source” is neither a necessary

nor a sufficient condition for recusal. Liteky, 510 U.S. at 554-55. The Liteky Court



                                          4
went on to state that even “judicial remarks during the course of a trial that are

critical or disapproving of, or even hostile to, counsel, the parties, or their cases,

ordinarily do not support a bias or partiality challenge.” Id.

      To begin, the illegal distribution of methamphetamine is a serious federal

criminal offense; methamphetamine is a Schedule II drug, the possession of which

is significantly penalized by Congress. 18 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B)(vii). My statement

that methamphetamine trafficking and addiction is “dangerous” and will be

“difficult to eradicate” if it takes hold in this District amounts to no more than that

drug dealing and drug addiction are undesirable and often dangerous for the

community.    In expressing a view that a drug that is unlawful is dangerous, I

echoed federal law.       Nor is there, to my knowledge, a legitimate pro-

methamphetamine constituency in the public. See Gomes v. Univ. of Me. Sys., 365

F. Supp. 2d 6, 31-32 (D. Me. 2005) (rejecting a claim that the Chair of a university

disciplinary panel, who had previously advocated against sexual assault, was biased

against a student charged with sexual assault because “[t]here is not exactly a

constituency in favor of sexual assault”).

      Second, the sources for my comments include my knowledge, experience, and

observations concerning the District‟s caseload, innumerable criminal proceedings,

including sentencings, over more than eight years of judicial service, and the

undeniable dangers to the people of this District posed by addiction and drug




                                             5
trafficking. My views are the very definition of those derived from the performance

of official judicial duties.2

       Third, my statements are entirely general in nature and not in any way case

specific. I did not and would not comment on any matter pending before me as a

judge. At the time of the newspaper interview, I did not know Mr. Corbin, did not

know about his arrest, and knew nothing about the circumstances that led to the

arrest and later indictment.3 I bear no personal ill-will whatsoever against him. He

is, as far as I am concerned, no different than any defendant charged with a federal

crime and is presumed innocent. As this charge proceeds through the Court, I have

the obligation to render fair and impartial justice, which I will perform without

favoritism toward or bias against Mr. Corbin. If he is acquitted of the pending

charge, it will be my duty to discharge him; if convicted, it will be my duty to

sentence him.

       Fourth, judges are not required to remain publicly mute. To the contrary,

Canon 4(A) authorizes judges to “speak, write . . . and participate in . . . law-related

activities.”   Furthermore, the Commentary to Canon 4(A) provides that, as a

“person specially learned in the law, a judge is in a unique position to contribute to

the improvement of the law . . . .” See Burton v. Am. Cyanamid, 690 F. Supp. 2d

757, 762-63 (E.D. Wis. 2010). It should come as no surprise that a federal judge

who routinely sentences people for serious federal violations, ranging from the

2 The assertion that I was unduly influenced by a GOA memorandum merits no discussion. Judges
are not required to sequester themselves from society in the unrealistic and unnecessary fashion
that Mr. Corbin‟s argument supposes.
3 On March 8, 2011, I approved the seizure of a vehicle that was allegedly involved in this case but

Mr. Corbin makes no claim concerning that approval. Seizure Warrant (Docket # 19).

                                                 6
possession   of   child   pornography   to       bank   robbery   to   the   possession   of

methamphetamine, disapproves of the commission of serious federal felonies. It

does not follow that to disapprove of crime means that a judge is incapable of being

fair and impartial in determining whether a person committed one.

      Justice Kennedy described the recusal test:

      [Section] 455(a) is triggered by an attitude or state of mind so resistant
      to fair and dispassionate inquiry as to cause a party, the public or a
      reviewing court to have reasonable grounds to question the neutral
      and objective character of a judge's rulings or findings. I think all
      would agree that a high threshold is required to satisfy this standard.
      Thus, under § 455(a), a judge should be disqualified only if it appears
      that he or she harbors an aversion, hostility or disposition of a kind
      that a fair-minded person could not set aside when judging the dispute.

Liteky, 510 U.S. at 557-58 (Kennedy, J. concurring).          That I made a statement

expressing concern about the dangers of an illegal drug cannot create the

appearance of any deep-seated favoritism or antagonism sufficient to convince a

reasonable person that I am unable to sit in fair judgment over Mr. Corbin‟s

criminal case.

      B.     Appearance of Impartiality

      Where the facts are insufficient to support a claim of personal bias, the

remaining analysis focuses on “whether the charge of lack of impartiality is

grounded on facts that would create a reasonable doubt concerning the judge's

impartiality . . . in the mind of the reasonable man.”            Kelley, 712 F.2d at 890

(quoting United States v. Cowden, 545 F.2d 257, 265 (1st Cir. 1976)). In the words

of the First Circuit, “disqualification is appropriate only if the facts provide what an

objective, knowledgeable member of the public would find to be a reasonable basis

                                             7
for doubting the judge‟s impartiality.” In re United States, 666 F.2d 690, 695 (1st

Cir. 1981). “The trial judge has a duty not to recuse himself or herself, if there is no

objective basis for recusal.” In re United States, 441 F.3d 44, 67 (1st Cir. 2006).

Mere suspicion of impartiality is not enough to secure a judge‟s disqualification; the

standard necessarily balances “the need to secure public confidence through

proceedings that appear impartial” with “the need to prevent parties from too easily

obtaining the disqualification of a judge” and from “manipulating the system for

strategic reasons, perhaps to obtain a judge more to their liking.” In re Allied-

Signal, Inc., 891 F.2d 967, 970 (1st Cir. 1989).

      The cases in this Circuit addressing statements made by judges to the media

are few, and none addresses facts similar to those Mr. Corbin presents. See, e.g., In

re Boston’s Children First, 244 F.3d 164, 170 (1st Cir. 2001) (granting recusal under

§ 455(a) where trial judge made case-specific comments to media that could

reasonably be construed as comments on merits of pending case). However, at least

one other jurisdiction has addressed general, non-case-specific judicial statements

to the media about the effects of certain crimes. See United States v. Bauer, 84 F.3d

1549, 1559-60 (9th Cir. 1997). In Bauer, the Ninth Circuit found no bias on facts

strikingly similar to those here, namely that a judge was quoted in a published

article as stating that he considered marijuana distribution a serious and pervasive

problem. See id. The Ninth Circuit‟s view is consistent with the First Circuit‟s

comment in In re Boston’s Children First that § 455(a) “must not be read to create a




                                           8
threshold for recusal so low as to make any out-of-court response to a reporter‟s

question the basis for a motion to recuse.” 244 F.3d at 171.

      The facts presented by Mr. Corbin—a government memorandum about

border security and my general statements to the media that drug trafficking from

Canada is dangerous to society and methamphetamine will be difficult to eradicate

if it takes hold in Maine—do not constitute “a reasonable basis for doubting the

judge‟s impartiality” in the eyes of “an objective, knowledgeable member of the

public.” In re United States, 666 F.2d at 695. Mr. Corbin has failed, on both counts,

to allege a factual basis sufficient to warrant my disqualification from presiding

over his pending criminal case.

      Finally, in his reply, Mr. Corbin makes the novel assertion that the

Government had no right to file a responsive memorandum because to do so “places

the Government in the role of advocate for Judge Woodcock, placing the Defendant

in the untenable position of being Judge Woodcock‟s opponent.” Def.’s Reply at 1.

Mr. Corbin cites no authority for the proposition that if a defendant moves for

recusal, the Government may not express a view on the merits of the motion.

      From my perspective, Mr. Corbin misapprehends the question here. I do not

take his motion to recuse personally.     It is a legal matter and, in making my

assessment, I should benefit by receiving the views of the parties. In filing the

motion, Mr. Corbin is not opposing me; he is defending the case.         In filing a

response, the Government is not defending me; it is prosecuting the case. It is

common practice for both parties to be heard on a motion for recusal to give the



                                          9
Court the benefit of more than one viewpoint. See In re United States, 441 F.3d 44,

49 (1st Cir. 2006) (referencing Defendant‟s opposition to Government‟s motion to

recuse); In re Basciano, 542 F.3d 950, 954-55 (2d Cir. 2008) (referencing

Government‟s memorandum in opposition to Defendant‟s motions to recuse).          I

reject his argument that the Government should not have filed a response.

III.   CONCLUSION

       The Court hereby DENIES the Defendant‟s Motion for Disqualification

(Docket # 28).

       SO ORDERED.


                               /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                               JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                               CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 14th day of November, 2011




                                        10
