                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                              DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA             )
                                     )
                                     )
                                     )
v.                                   )           NO. 1:99-CR-48-DBH-03
                                     )
JAMES RAYMOND WALKER,                )
                                     )
                  DEFENDANT          )


           ORDER ON MOTION TO CORRECT CLERICAL ERROR


      The defendant James Raymond Walker has filed a “Motion to Correct

Clerical Order [sic], Pursuant to Rule § 36 of the Federal Rules of Criminal

Procedure.” Docket Item 74. Because the record conclusively reveals that no

clerical error occurred, I DENY the motion.

      Walker initially was sentenced in this court by Judge Carter on May 18,

2000. In that Judgment and Commitment, Judge Carter ordered the Bureau of

Prisons to give Walker credit for time served on an underlying state sentence.

Judgment at 7 (Docket Item 42). Walker appealed (not on that issue) and the

First Circuit Court of Appeals remanded for resentencing because of an error in

the Guideline calculations.

      At the resentencing on March 27, 2001, Judge Carter told defense

counsel in response to a question that the only change was in the base offense

level and the imposition of a sentence at the bottom of the new Guideline

range. Tr. of Sentencing Proceedings at 3 (Docket Item 53).
     Thereafter, on March 28, 2001, and before issuing the Amended

Judgment and Commitment, Judge Carter sent the following letter to both

counsel:

                  On reflection after the proceedings yesterday in the
           above matter for the purposes of reimposing sentence after
           remand from the Court of Appeals, I believe I have
           discovered sua sponte a concern that may be an issue with
           counsel about the contents of the Amended Memorandum
           of Sentencing Judgment and the Judgment to be entered in
           this case. You will recall that after I had articulated the
           imposition of sentence in the proceedings, counsel had, out
           of the hearing of the Court, a discussion about something
           in the papers of the case. Mr. Silverstein then asked me an
           opaque question to the effect of, “Am I correct that there
           will be nothing changed in the new Judgment from the
           original Judgment except for the correction of the error
           raised by the Court of Appeals?” He did not direct me to
           any language in the prior Judgment to which he had
           reference. Since I had not recently reviewed the prior
           Judgment, I was not fully cognizant of all of its language. I
           indicated to Mr. Silverstein in response to his question that
           the only thing that would be changed was the rectification
           of the error generated by the Court of Appeals.

                   During a rather long drive home yesterday, out of
           mystification as to the reason for Mr. Silverstein’s question
           and, perhaps, a keen sense of danger, I have reviewed the
           original Sentencing Judgment. I have discovered some
           language in it which I am certain was inserted therein as a
           result of some clerical error on my part back in May of 2000
           when Defendant was previously sentenced. That language
           is the following:

                        It is specifically ORDERED that the
                 Bureau of Prisons, in computing the time
                 Defendant is to serve the execution of these
                 federal sentences give Defendant credit for
                 time he has served on the underlying state
                 sentence as of the time he commences
                 execution of these federal sentences.

           That language follows immediately upon the provision that
           both sentences imposed in the federal case “be served
           consecutively to the State of Maine sentence that the
           Defendant is now serving.”



                                                                           2
                  The inconsistency between the two statements is
           apparent. Further, I never at any time intended that the
           Defendant would get credit in serving the federal sentences
           for the time he served on a previous state sentence. I have
           no idea how the subject language found its way into the
           prior Memorandum of Sentencing Judgment.

                  In the proceedings yesterday, both in chambers and
           in the courtroom, Mr. Silverstein premised his argument for
           a sentence at the low end of the Guidelines at the present
           time upon the fact that this Defendant would have to serve
           some four to six years on a state sentence before
           commencing execution of these federal sentences. I took
           that argument into account in determining that the low end
           of the Guideline range in this case was appropriate.
           Further, I had no intention whatever that the Defendant
           would receive credit for the time served on the state
           sentence in executing the federal sentences and I do not
           now so intend. Finally, I very much doubt that I have the
           authority, in any event, to order the Bureau of Prisons to
           give a defendant credit on a federal sentence for time spent
           in execution of a state sentence.

                  Accordingly, I do not intend to include in the
           Amended Memorandum of Sentencing Judgment resulting
           from yesterday’s proceedings the language quoted above
           indicating that the Defendant should receive such credit.
           However, since the issue was not specifically raised and
           articulated in the proceedings yesterday, I am going to enter
           a Procedural Order reserving entry of judgment in this case
           and ordering that any counsel who has an objection to my
           proposal to omit the subject language from the Amended
           Memorandum of Sentencing Judgment and Judgment to
           now be entered herein as a result of the redetermination of
           sentence file a memorandum of law setting forth his or her
           position or objection on or before April 13, 2001. If such a
           memorandum is filed, it should be responded to in
           accordance with the terms of the Procedural Order and I
           will consider a resolution of the issue on the papers unless I
           believe a further sentencing proceeding is required.

Judge Carter’s Letter to Counsel (Docket Item 51). On April 13, 2001, defense

counsel responded as follows:

           NOW COMES the Defendant, by and through undersigned
           counsel, and respectfully notifies this Honorable Court of
           his intention not to contest the sentence imposed upon him
           by this Court on March 27, 2001 and as indicated in the
           Court’s letter to counsel dated March 28, 2001.

                                                                            3
            Notwithstanding, the Defendant’s present intention,
            undersigned counsel has attached, for the Court’s
            edification, excerpts of the Transcript of Sentencing
            Proceedings and directs the Court’s attention to the
            colloquy located at pages 26, 28-29. Undersigned counsel
            serves this Notice with the express written authorization of
            and consent given by the Defendant.

Def.’s Notice Not to Contest Sentence (Docket Item 54).

       On April 26, 2001, Judge Carter entered an Amended Judgment and

Commitment that omitted the language in the original Judgment and

Commitment that had directed the Bureau of Prisons to give Walker credit for

time served on the underlying state sentence. Amended Judgment (Docket Item

56).

       It is apparent that there was no clerical error in the omission of the

credit for time served. Instead, the record disproves Walker’s contention that

the Amended Judgment and Commitment failed to reflect what the Judge and

counsel intended. As for Walker’s last contention, raised in Reply Brief, that

his lawyer did not have authority to respond to Judge Carter’s letter in the

manner in which he did respond, that has nothing to do with a Rule 36 motion

concerning a clerical error.

       The motion is DENIED.

       SO ORDERED.

       DATED THIS 1ST DAY OF DECEMBER, 2011


                                             /S/D. BROCK HORNBY____________
                                             D. BROCK HORNBY
                                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                                                              4
