                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                    DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )
                                )     CRIMINAL ACTION NO.
v.                              )     10-10300-DPW
                                )
TARLEE TEAH,                    )
                                )
               Defendant.       )
                                )


                               MEMORANDUM
                            August 20, 2012

     Tarlee Teah, the defendant in this drug prosecution, moved

(Dkt. No. 26) to exclude from evidence all items seized during a

search of a vehicle he was using on August 17, 2010.    This

Memorandum provides a full statement of the reason supporting my

electronic order entered January 25, 2012 denying that motion.

                      I.     FINDINGS OF FACT

     Following a full evidentiary hearing and consideration of

the submissions of the parties, I make the following findings.1

     At approximately 4:30 p.m. on August 17, 2010, Detective

Gary Hagerty of the Lynn Police Department was driving an

unmarked cruiser in the Highlands area of Lynn, Massachusetts.

Detective Hagerty had a sound basis for believing the Highlands



1
   As will be apparent from these findings of fact, I largely
credit the testimony of Detective Hagerty with respect to the
facts relevant and material to the Fourth Amendment
determinations made below. Teah collaterally attacked Detective
Hagerty’s credibility, but that attack did not significantly
affect my choice to credit his testimony with respect to this
motion.
area to be a high-crime neighborhood.   While on patrol in the

area, Detective Hagerty pulled up behind a Nissan Pathfinder that

was stopped in the middle of Lawton Avenue dropping a passenger

off.   Detective Hagerty recognized the Pathfinder from his time

working with a FBI task force investigating gang-related drug

operations on the North Shore.

       Detective Hagerty used a laptop in his car to run the

Pathfinder’s plates.   The computer informed him that the

Pathfinder’s registration had expired, so he turned on his lights

and siren and pulled the Pathfinder over.   As he approached the

driver’s side window, Detective Hagerty saw the driver move

forward in his seat, as if to place something underneath it.

When he got to the window, Detective Hagerty recognized the

driver as Tarlee Teah, who he knew had prior drug charges in Lynn

and had a pending case for a charge of assault to kill stemming

from a shooting.   That morning Detective Hagerty had attended a

FBI Task Force meeting at which Teah was named as the suspected

crack cocaine supplier to a number of targets in an ongoing

investigation code-named “Melting Pot.”

       Detective Hagerty asked Teah for his license and

registration.   As Teah reached over to his glove compartment for

his registration, Detective Hagerty noticed that the left pocket

of Teah’s shorts contained a substantial sum of money, and that

his right pocket displayed a large bulge.   Teah produced his


                                  2
license and registration, and Detective Hagerty noted that the

registration had expired.   He also observed that Teah appeared

extremely nervous: Teah’s hands were shaking as he handed over

his license and registration, his voice trembled when answering

Detective Hagerty’s questions, and his heartbeat was visible

through his t-shirt.   Detective Hagerty took Teah’s documents and

returned to his squad car to write a ticket.

     A few minutes later, Detective Hagerty approached Teah at

the driver’s side window to reconfirm Teah’s address and inform

him that he was going to have the car towed for the expired

registration infraction.    Upon returning to his squad car,

Detective Hagerty called for backup because he was going to

remove Teah from the Pathfinder so the vehicle could be towed.

Five officers arrived a few minutes later.

     When backup arrived, Detective Hagerty began telling the

officers what had happened and his observations thus far.      As he

was doing so, Officer Guillermo observed Teah moving around in

the Pathfinder.   The officers then removed Teah from the driver’s

compartment, and pat-frisked him.     The driver’s side door

remained open while Teah was being patted down, and from outside

the car Officer Wonoski observed a silver object underneath the

front seat, which he recognized to be the slide aperture of a

handgun.




                                  3
     Teah was handcuffed and read his Miranda warnings.           The

officer who read him his Miranda warnings then asked if Teah had

a license to carry the gun found under the seat, and Teah

responded that he did not.    At approximately the same time,

Officer Guillermo spotted a purple Crown Royal bag on the floor

of the back seat in the area in which Officer Guillermo had seen

Teah moving before he was asked to exit the vehicle.        Officer

Guillermo noticed that the bag appeared full, and discovered that

it contained 209.3 grams of cocaine base and 124.7 grams of

cocaine.   After a photographer was called to capture the location

of a Smith & Wesson .40 caliber handgun under the front seat and

the drugs in the rear, officers towed the vehicle away.

                            II.   DISCUSSION

A.   Legal Principles

     The Fourth Amendment prohibits searches and seizures that

are unreasonable.   Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 9 (1968).          In the

absence of an applicable exception to the warrant requirement,

searches undertaken without a valid warrant supported by probable

cause are presumed to be unreasonable.         United States v.

McGregor, 650 F.3d 813, 820 (1st Cir. 2011).

     An officer may stop a vehicle if he witnesses the driver

commit a traffic offense.     Id. (“An officer can stop a car if he

sees a driver commit a traffic offense, even if the stop is just

an excuse to investigate something else.”).        Once a valid stop

                                    4
has been made, an officer may “then order the occupants out of

the auto,” id. (citing Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 410

(1997), and may perform a pat-frisk of the occupants if, under

the totality of the circumstances, the officer has a

particularized objective basis to suspect that the occupants may

be dangerous and have weapons within their ready reach (including

within the vehicle itself).   Id. (citing Michigan v. Long, 463

U.S. 1032, 1037 (1983)).

B.   Analysis

     Here, there is no dispute that Detective Hagerty witnessed

Teah commit a traffic offense.    Consequently, the inquiry turns

on whether under the totality of the circumstances Detective

Hagerty had reasonable suspicion that Teah was dangerous and that

a weapon was easily accessible to him in the vehicle.

     The record contains ample evidence to support Detective

Hagerty’s reasonable suspicion that Teah was armed and dangerous.

Detective Hagerty stopped Teah in a high-crime area, and Teah had

prior drug and firearm charges.   Teah was, at the time, awaiting

trial on an assault to kill charge stemming from an attempted

shooting of a woman.   Detective Hagerty also knew that Teah was a

person identified as of interest in a FBI Task Force

investigation and was suspected to be a crack cocaine supplier to




                                  5
a number of other gang members targeted in the investigation.2

Detective Hagerty had personal knowledge of all of these facts

from his interactions with Teah in the past, and his own

involvement with the FBI Task Force.

     Detective Hagerty also observed a number of Teah’s actions

during the stop that support a finding of reasonable suspicion.

Teah was visibly nervous; his hands and voice were shaking, and

Detective Hagerty observed that Teah’s heart was pounding.   When

he first approached Teah, Detective Hagerty noticed a large,

unexplained bulge in Teah’s right pocket.3   And Detective Hagerty

and Officer Guillermo each witnessed Teah moving around in the

vehicle before they ordered him out and performed the pat-frisk.

     United States v. McKoy, relied on by Teah, is inapposite.

There, fruits of the officers’ pat-frisk were suppressed because

the pat-frisk was based solely on the driver’s nervousness and

location in a high-crime area.   428 F.3d 38, 40 (1st Cir. 2005).

Here, Detective Hagerty had more substantial reason to believe

Teah was dangerous.   Not only was he stopped in a high-crime

neighborhood and acting in a fashion more nervous than Detective

Hagerty could remember any other driver to whom he had given a



2
   The First Circuit has repeatedly recognized that guns have
become “tools of the trade” in the illicit drug business. See,
e.g., United States v. Cresta, 825 F.2d 538, 554 (1st Cir. 1987).
3
  The record does not disclose what, if anything, was located in
Teah’s right pocket.

                                 6
ticket in his career acting, Teah was suspected of drug

trafficking by law enforcement involved in a joint investigation;

had a number of arrests involving guns (including a pending trial

for a shooting); had a large unexplained bulge in his right

pocket; and was twice observed moving around in the vehicle after

he was stopped, once in a manner consistent with placing

something underneath the front seat of the vehicle.

     Once officers removed Teah from the Pathfinder and began

their pat-frisk, Officer Winowski saw a gun in plain view under

the driver’s seat.   Teah was placed in handcuffs for the

officers’ safety, and admitted that he did not have a license for

the firearm.   As Teah was being placed in handcuffs, Officer

Guillermo noticed a purple Crown Royal bag on the floor of the

rear seats of the Pathfinder.   The bag appeared full, and was

located in the approximate area Officer Guillermo had witnessed

Teah moving towards while he was still inside the vehicle.    Upon

opening the bag, Officer Guillermo discovered the crack cocaine

and powder cocaine that was subsequently seized.

     That Teah was placed in handcuffs for officers’ safety

moments before admitting that he did not have a license for the

gun and before drugs were found on the rear floor of the vehicle

does not undermine the availability of Terry doctrine to justify

Teah’s restraint in this setting.    The officers here were not

required to leave unsecured a person they had reasonable


                                 7
suspicion was armed and dangerous merely because they did not

know whether Teah had a license to carry the gun found within

arm’s reach under the front seat.    Instead, the officers acted

prudently in handcuffing Teah for everyone’s safety while

continuing the investigation.   See, e.g., Terry, 392 U.S. at 30

(noting that officers are entitled “to take swift measures to

discover the true facts and neutralize[] the threat of harm if it

materialize[s]”).

     Teah argues that he was arrested without probable cause, so

his statement admitting that he did not have a license for the

gun should be suppressed.   Although he does not focus on it,4

Teah’s most promising argument is that the latest he was arrested

was when he was placed in handcuffs because officers did not have

probable cause to arrest him at that time since they did not yet

know whether Teah had a license for the gun and no drugs had been

found.

     However, “when officer safety is a legitimate concern, a

Terry stop appropriately may involve the application of

handcuffs” without converting the stop into a de facto arrest.

United States v. Pontoo, 666 F.3d 20, 31 (1st Cir. 2011); see

United States v. Fornia-Castillo, 408 F.3d 52, 64 (1st Cir. 2005)

(“[N]either the use of handcuffs nor the drawing of a weapon



4
   Teah primarily argues that he was arrested the moment officers
asked him to leave his vehicle.

                                 8
necessarily transforms a valid Terry stop into a de facto

arrest.”).   Indeed, “[w]here an investigatory stop is justified

at its inception, it will generally not morph into a de facto

arrest as long as ‘the actions undertaken by the officer[s]

following the stop were reasonably responsive to the

circumstances justifying the stop in the first place as augmented

by information gleaned by the officer[s] during the stop.’”

United States v. Chaney, 647 F.3d 401, 409 (1st Cir. 2011)

(citation omitted).

     To show that the use of handcuffs in a Terry stop does not

exceed Terry’s limits and convert the stop into a de facto

arrest, officers “must be able to point to some specific fact or

circumstance that could have supported a reasonable belief that

the use of such restraints was necessary to carry out the

legitimate purposes of the stop without exposing law enforcement

officers, the public, or the suspect himself to an undue risk of

harm.”    United States v. Acosta-Colon, 157 F.3d 9, 18-19 (1st

Cir. 1998) (emphasis omitted).   That showing has been made here.

     In Chaney the First Circuit held that the use of handcuffs

and drawn weapons did not convert a Terry stop into a de facto

arrest.   647 F.3d at 408.   There, United States Marshals raided a

motel room in order to execute an arrest warrant for a suspected

crack cocaine dealer named Peter Boyd.   The motel room was

registered to Brigit Hebert, who Marshals knew had been arrested


                                  9
for drug-related crimes in the past.     Unbeknownst to the

Marshals, however, a third party, an acquaintance of Boyd’s named

Vincent Chaney, was present in the motel room.        Marshals knocked

on the motel room door, announced their presence, and arrested

Boyd when he answered the door.     They then entered the motel room

with guns drawn to perform a protective sweep.        Id. at 403.   They

discovered Hebert in bed and Chaney standing by the edge of the

bed.    When ordered out of bed, Hebert complied.     Chaney was

ordered to stop moving and get on the ground, but was not

compliant despite repeated commands.     Eventually, Chaney complied

and was handcuffed while the Marshals completed their sweep of

the motel room, which turned up drugs and ammunition in plain

view.     Id.   Additional drugs were found in Chaney’s pockets.

Chaney sought to suppress the evidence Marshals found on his

person after he was handcuffed.      Id. at 404-05.

        The First Circuit agreed with the district court that the

use of handcuffs and drawn weapons did not transform the

Marshals’ investigatory stop of Chaney into a de facto arrest.

Id. at 408.     The First Circuit began by identifying the general

test for distinguishing between temporary detentions and de facto

arrests: “we inquire, in light of the totality of the

circumstances, whether a reasonable person in the suspect’s

position would have understood [his] position ‘to be tantamount

to being under arrest.’”      Id. at 409 (quoting United States v.


                                   10
Zapata, 18 F.3d 971, 975 (1st Cir. 1994)).     Noting that neither

the use of handcuffs nor drawn guns is determinative of the

question, id. (citing Fornia-Castillo, 408 F.3d at 64), the First

Circuit found:

     no error in the district court’s finding that the
     specific circumstances of the November 30, 2005 raid
     gave rise to a reasonable concern for officer security
     that justified the use of handcuffs and drawn handguns.
     The unanticipated presence, in a darkened motel room
     inhabited by two suspected drug dealers, of an
     unfamiliar man who ignored repeated orders from the
     police to stop moving and drop to the ground might
     alone be enough to justify more intrusive measure for
     briefly securing him during an investigative stop.

Id. at 409.

     The First Circuit cited the Ninth Circuit’s decision in

United States v. Taylor, 716 F.2d 701 (9th Cir. 1983), for

support.   There, officers had been warned that the driver of a

truck was dangerous, and were told that others with him should be

considered dangerous as well.    Id. at 708.   Officers approached

the passenger in the truck with guns drawn and ordered him to

raise his hands.   He refused to do so, and instead “made furtive

movements with his hands inside the vehicle.”     Id.    Only after

officers gave two more orders did the passenger comply and raise

his hands.    He was removed from the truck and handcuffed.      Id.

The Ninth Circuit held that the passenger had not been de facto

arrested and the use of handcuffs and the frisking of his person

for weapons were justified for officers’ safety.        Id. at 709.



                                 11
     As in Chaney and Taylor, the law enforcement officers here

were justified in handcuffing Teah for their safety when they

discovered a gun underneath his front seat.    As noted above, the

pat-frisk of Teah was justified by legitimate concerns for

officers’ safety.   Upon discovering the handgun and thus

verifying the safety concern which justified the pat-frisk in the

first place, the officers made a split second judgment to place

Teah in handcuffs to protect themselves.    Such a move was

“reasonably responsive” to the developing circumstances the

officers faced, and “necessary to carry out the legitimate

purposes of the stop without exposing” officers to an undue risk

of harm.   Therefore, the officers’ use of handcuffs did not

convert their otherwise proper Terry stop and frisk into an

improper de facto arrest.   See Chaney, 647 F.3d at 409; Taylor,

716 F.2d at 709.

     Nor do the other aspects of Teah’s detention support a

finding of a de facto arrest.   The duration of the stop was

short, lasting roughly ten minutes.     See, e.g., United States v.

Owens, 167 F.3d 739, 749 (1st Cir. 1999) (finding a fifty minute

detention was not a de facto arrest).    Approximately six officers

were involved, but they neither voiced threats nor brandished

their weapons, and their approach was measured and polite.     See,

e.g., Zapata, 18 F.3d at 975 (finding no de facto arrest in an

incident involving five officers displaying these


                                12
characteristics).   The encounter took place in public.    Id.

(finding the public setting of the encounter to weigh in favor of

a finding that it was not a de facto arrest).   They did read him

his Miranda rights.    However, while often a sign a person has

been taken under arrest, a Miranda recital independently has

valuable warnings for a Terry detainee as well.

     Weighing the totality of these circumstances and the

officers’ safety rationale for placing Teah in handcuffs, I

cannot find that a reasonable person would consider his position

to be tantamount to being under arrest.    See id.   The officers’

actions therefore did not transform the lawful Terry stop into a

de facto arrest.    As a consequence, Teah’s statement that he did

not have a license for the firearm, and Officer Guillermo’s

discovery of the drugs on the rear floor of the vehicle, need not

be suppressed as products of an arrest without probable cause.5


5
   Even if Teah had been placed under arrest at the time he was
put in handcuffs, suppression would not be warranted because
discovery of the drugs in the back of the car and the fact that
Teah did not have a license for the gun, was inevitable. An
unregistered vehicle may not be driven on public roads in
Massachusetts. See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 90 § 9 (“No person shall
operate . . . any motor vehicle . . . unless such vehicle is
registered in accordance with this chapter . . . .”). Detective
Hagerty had already told Teah he was going to tow Teah’s car, and
although the relevant inventory-search procedures were not
produced during the evidentiary hearing (because they were not
challenged at all by Teah), the Supreme Court “has consistently
sustained police intrusions into automobiles impounded or
otherwise in lawful police custody where the process is aimed at
securing or protecting the car and its contents.” South Dakota
v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364, 373 (1976). For its part, the First
Circuit has found that where “[t]he record establishes

                                 13
                        III.   CONCLUSION

     For the reasons set forth above, I have denied Teah’s motion

to suppress (Dkt. No. 26).




                               /s/ Douglas P. Woodlock
                               DOUGLAS P. WOODLOCK
                               UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




unequivocally that the car containing the contraband was
unregistered” and thus “could not lawfully be driven on a public
highway . . . the state police surely would have impounded it
and, in accordance with standard practice, conducted a routine
inventory search.” United States v. Zapata, 18 F.3d 971, 979
(1st Cir. 1994). So too, here.

                                14
