Case 2:11-cr-00123-DBH Document 48 Filed 05/15/12 Page 1 of 2          PageID #: 81



                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                              DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
                                       )
v.                                     )     CRIMINAL NO. 2:11-cr-123-DBH
                                       )
LEONARD JEAN, JR.,                     )
                                       )
                   DEFENDANT           )


                   ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR
                         BAIL PENDING APPEAL


      The defendant Leonard Jean pleaded guilty to theft from a federally

licensed firearms dealer.    At his sentencing, I determined that his guideline

range was 24 to 30 months. I granted his motion for a downward departure on

two bases: aberrant behavior, USSG § 5K2.20, and extraordinary physical

condition, USSG § 5H1.4. I then sentenced Jean to 12 months and 1 day, and

I recommended to the Bureau of Prisons that he be assigned to a medical

facility, specifically a care level 4. If Jean obtains good time credit, he is likely

to serve somewhat over 10 months. I also allowed Jean to self-report. Jean

has appealed his sentence and now moves for bail pending appeal. The motion

for bail pending appeal is DENIED.

      At this point, Jean is not a risk of flight or likely to pose a danger to the

safety of others or the community, 18 U.S.C. § 3143(b)(1)(A), and the appeal is

not for the purpose of delay, 18 § 3143(b)(1)(B). But I conclude that the appeal

does not satisfy a necessary element for bail, namely that it raise “a substantial

question of law or fact likely to result in . . . a sentence that does not include a
Case 2:11-cr-00123-DBH Document 48 Filed 05/15/12 Page 2 of 2         PageID #: 82



term of imprisonment, or . . . a reduced sentence to a term of imprisonment

less than the total of the time already served plus the expected duration of the

appeal process.” Id. at (iii), (iv). Although Jean is understandably concerned

that the Bureau of Prisons will not provide the medical care he wants for his

unusual and serious physical condition (Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia

Syndrome), I have concluded that BOP can do so at an adequate level, albeit

perhaps not at the level that Jean now obtains as a free man. But given the

nature of Jean’s offense—breaking and entering in the nighttime the building

that served as both the elderly firearms retailer’s place of business and the

home for the dealer and his spouse; the property damage Jean caused in doing

so; and, more importantly the damage to the sense of security of these victims

who had served coffee to this defendant in their home over the years, counted

him as a member of the small community in which they live, and showed him

the afternoon before the nighttime crime the very weapons that he stole—I

could not justify a noncustodial sentence after considering the factors set forth

in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).    Although trial and sentencing judges must always

remain open to the authority of the court of appeals to disagree with them and

to find their sentencing reasoning defective, I see no possibility that the court of

appeals will vacate or lower this sentence.

      SO ORDERED.

      DATED THIS 15TH DAY OF MAY, 2012

                                              /S/D. BROCK HORNBY
                                              D. BROCK HORNBY
                                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE



                                                                                  2
