Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 1 of 13                      PageID #: 296



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                      DISTRICT OF MAINE


DAVID KENNETH PREISEL,    )
                          )
     Movant               )
v.                        )               2:08-cr-00178-DBH
                          )
                          )               2:11-cv-00359-DBH
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
                          )
     Respondent           )


               RECOMMENDED DECISION ON 28 U.S.C. § 2255 MOTION

       David Preisel, convicted of cocaine, heroin, and firearms offenses and serving a 144-

month sentence, has moved pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255 to vacate, set aside, or correct the

sentence he received, asserting three separate grounds for relief. Grounds one and three assert, in

rather undeveloped fashion, a direct claim that Preisel’s rights under the Fifth Amendment to the

United States Constitution were violated because his statements were improperly used against

him and that his rights were also violated under the Fourteenth Amendment because he was

denied due process and equal protection of the laws. However, the crux of Preisel’s petition is

found in ground two, which asserts that his sixth amendment right to effective assistance of

counsel was violated, specifically because his counsel failed to challenge the admissibility of

statements he made to the police at the time of his initial encounter with them and because

counsel lied to him and coerced him into agreeing to plead guilty. Preisel also argues that

counsel was ineffective in failing to familiarize himself with the law and facts of Preisel’s case

and failing to conduct his own investigation into the case, although Preisel does not indicate what

exculpatory evidence that investigation might have produced. Having reviewed the expanded
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 2 of 13                    PageID #: 297



record provided to the Court by the parties, I now recommend that the Court deny Preisel’s

petition and enter a summary dismissal of the proceedings without further evidentiary hearing.

                              RELEVANT PROCEDURAL HISTORY

       Charged with cocaine, heroin, and firearms offenses, David Preisel pleaded guilty under

an agreement that waived his right to appeal “[a] sentence of imprisonment that does not exceed

180 months.” (ECF No. 7.) In the absence of a Government cooperation-based motion, Preisel

faced a mandatory minimum sentence of 10 years on the cocaine charge and 5 years consecutive

on the firearms offense. As a result of the Government cooperation-based departure motion, the

Court actually imposed a combined term of 144 months, 96 months on the drug charges and 48

months to be served consecutively on the firearms charges. (ECF No. 29.) Preisel filed a pro se

notice of appeal (ECF. No. 32) which led to a summary affirmance by the First Circuit Court of

Appeals noting that enforcement of the waiver of appeal provision would not work a miscarriage

of justice. (ECF No. 44.)

       At the sentencing hearing the Court determined that the guideline range would be 210 to

262 months, and that application of the statutory consecutive minimum of five years brought the

range to 270 to 322 months. (S. Tr. 17.) Fully cognizant of its departure authority, the Court

concluded that “the statutory mandatory minimums do adequately reflect the sentencing factors

at work here in Section 3553(a)” and made the statutory mandatory minimum term of 180

months an appropriate sentence upon which to base its further consideration of the Government’s

motion regarding cooperation. After reviewing the Government’s departure motion and

supporting letter, the Court concluded that a 20 percent departure should be applied as

recommended, bringing the sentence to 144 months. (S.Tr. 21.)




                                                2
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 3 of 13                       PageID #: 298



       Once Preisel filed this timely § 2255 petition, the parties expanded the record by

submitting certain exhibits from trial counsel’s file and other police records. (ECF No. 61.)

Preisel’s Exhibit 1A is a redacted page 3 of a 5-page report by an unidentified author describing

some of the circumstances leading to Preisel’s arrest. Preisel’s Exhibits 2A-3A are duplicate

copies of the same January 7, 2009, letter counsel wrote to Preisel, at Preisel’s request, while

Preisel was at the Strafford (N.H.) Jail, discussing the need for Preisel to make a decision

regarding cooperation and advising Preisel of the admissibility of certain statements made during

his proffer session. Exhibits 4 and 5 consist of docket entries and CJA billing information from

Preisel’s case. Exhibit 6 is an October 5, 2008, letter from trial counsel to Preisel that enclosed

the discovery materials counsel had received from the Government. Exhibit 7A is one page of

an undated investigative report of an unidentified author describing information from unnamed

sources that produced the arrest. Preisel’s Exhibits 7B & C appear to be selected portions of the

same police report. Exhibit 8 is a September 11, 2008, letter from trial counsel to Preisel at an

address in Alfred, Maine summarizing the results of a meeting with the Assistant United States

Attorney.

       The Government also submitted its own exhibits in support of the expanded record.

Government Exhibit 1 is a proffer agreement between Preisel and the United States Attorney

with the handwritten date July 14, 2008. The agreement specified that the Government did not

agree to make any motions in Preisel’s behalf or promise to enter a plea agreement, but would

only assess the proffer information for purposes of making prosecutorial decisions. After

specifying the circumstances under which Preisel’s statements could be used, the agreement

provided in paragraph 5 that Preisel “waives the application of Fed. R. Evid. 410 and Fed. R.

Crim. P. 11(f) as to any statement that he . . . makes pursuant to this agreement and which



                                                  3
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 4 of 13                     PageID #: 299



the government is otherwise entitled under this agreement to introduce in evidence.” The proffer

agreement bore the signatures of Preisel, defense counsel, and two representatives of the

Government.

       Government Exhibit 2 is a September 16, 2008, letter from trial counsel to Preisel. In it,

counsel advised Preisel “to reconsider any decision to litigate issues that you have already

admitted to” and reminded him that statements he made at the proffer session could be used to

impeach him if he testified at trial and also to counter any defense. Trial counsel also reminded

Preisel that cooperation meant “full cooperation and acceptance of responsibility.” He told

Preisel that at offense level 34 and criminal history category III, his Guideline range would be

188 to 235 months followed by a mandatory minimum of five years on the firearms count. Trial

counsel expressed his belief that “we may be able to do much better” if the Government filed a

cooperation-based departure motion, which would enable the Court to ignore the mandatory

minimum term on the firearms charge. Nielsen explained that the plea agreement “that you need

to sign” provided no guarantee the Government would seek a downward departure and permitted

an appeal only of a sentence in excess of 180 months.

       Counsel advised Preisel to “make yourself the star witness for the Federal prosecutor and

cooperate fully to assure the Government’s request for a downward departure.” Preisel’s

substantial cooperation would “likely cause a sentence close to or below the 180 month cap as

per the plea agreement.” It was up to Preisel to decide. The Government was prepared to

present Preisel before the grand jury “but to do that you need to execute these documents.”

Government Exhibit 3 contains handwritten notes reading: “D must cooperate w/ Gov to get

below 180 months.” The notes continue: “no cooperation, no acceptance = Base level 36 or 38 -

this could get 30 to life range.”



                                                 4
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 5 of 13                      PageID #: 300



                       INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL STANDARD

       Preisel’s 28 U.S.C. § 2255 claims are dependent on proving ineffective assistance of

counsel under the Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984) Sixth Amendment standard

and Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52 (1985), a case addressing ineffective assistance claims related

to plea decisions. His first and third grounds, alleging barebones constitutional violations, have

no traction at all unless viewed through the lens of ineffective assistance of counsel. “In order to

prevail,” Preisel must show “both that counsel’s representation fell below an objective standard

of reasonableness and that there exists a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s

unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.” United States v.

De La Cruz, 514 F.3d 121, 140 (1st Cir. 2008) (citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688, 694). “In

other words,” Preisel “must demonstrate both seriously-deficient performance on the part of his

counsel and prejudice resulting there from.” Id. “Moreover, when, as in this case, a petition for

federal habeas relief is presented to the judge who presided at the petitioner’s plea and

sentencing, the judge is at liberty to employ the knowledge gleaned during previous proceedings

and make findings based thereon without convening an additional hearing.” United States v.

McGill, 11 F.3d 223, 225 (1st Cir. 1993).

                                            DISCUSSION

       The Government’s first argument as to all of the factual allegations raised in Preisel’s

memorandum of law is that Preisel’s memorandum was not signed under penalty of perjury,

though Preisel signed his form motion under penalty of perjury. Preisel explains in his reply that

he “signed the final page of the form that the court sent him.” Preisel notes that the

memorandum was attached to the form motion and “the motion and memorandum were as one,

and the defendant asks the court to accept it as so.” (Reply at 2, ECF No. 75.) Given my



                                                 5
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 6 of 13                       PageID #: 301



ultimate recommendation in this case, I think that Preisel has the better position on this issue.

Rule 12 of the Rules Governing Section 2255 Proceedings reads: “The Federal Rules of Civil

Procedure and the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, to the extent that they are not

inconsistent with any statutory provisions or these rules, may be applied to a proceeding under

these rules.” In this case, if the Court did not accept Preisel’s argument that the motion and

memorandum “were as one,” an argument I am willing to accept, I would recommend that the

remedy would be to call the omission to Preisel’s attention and give him an opportunity to

promptly correct it as, by analogy, is permitted under Rule 11(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil

Procedure in the case of unsigned pleadings. Given my conclusion that Preisel’s factual

allegations, even if asserted under penalty of perjury, do not warrant relief under § 2255, I see no

reason to recommend denying this petition on the basis of the technical violation raised

repeatedly by the Government in its memorandum. (See Answer at 20, 27-28, 38, ECF No. 72.)

I will instead turn to the merits of the various contentions Preisel raises.

A.     The Admissibility of the Statements

       Preisel asserts this claim regarding the admissibility of his statements as both a

standalone, fifth amendment constitutional claim and a claim that trial counsel provided

ineffective assistance of counsel in not challenging both the statements made by him during an

investigatory stop and the statements he made when in police custody following his arrest.

Preisel’s claims, made in ground one and ground two, are that the statements he made to

investigators should have been suppressed because, at the time Preisel made them, (1) he was in

such a “plainly obvious state of intoxication” as a result of having used heroin that he could not

act voluntarily and (2) he was not warned of his rights consistent with Miranda v. Arizona, 384




                                                   6
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 7 of 13                        PageID #: 302



U.S. 436 (1966). He further argues that his counsel’s failure to challenge the admissibility of the

statements by a motion to suppress was ineffective assistance.

       The investigative reports, portions of affidavits, and letters from the prosecutor that

Preisel filed in support of his petition (ECF Nos. 56-1 & 56-7) reveal that the police had a

particular residence in Saco, Maine under surveillance. An informant who had just been inside

the residence told the police that Preisel and others were inside using heroin and that the

informant had observed two firearms inside the residence in Preisel’s possession. A second

informant confirmed this information. Shortly thereafter, the officers observed Preisel exit the

residence with a blue backpack. They stopped and detained him, apparently at gunpoint, (ECF

No. 56-1, Ex. 1B, letter from AUSA to Scott Hastings) and inquired if he had any weapons on

his person. Preisel told them he had no weapons on his person, but that he had two inside the

blue backpack. The officers knew from prior information that Preisel was a convicted felon and

user of heroin and crack cocaine. According to Preisel, he was not advised of his Miranda rights

until hours after he was taken to the police station. He argues that his statements regarding the

firearms were inadmissible because they were the product of a custodial interrogation in the

absence of Miranda and that, even if he had been provided warnings, his state of intoxication was

such as to render his statements involuntary. (Unsworn Reply, ECF No. 75.)

       As far as Preisel’s attempt to raise a direct challenge to the admissibility of his

statements, Preisel’s failure to challenge the admissibility in the trial court or on direct appeal

bars a collateral attack based upon his claim of lack of voluntariness unless Preisel can

demonstrate cause excusing the default and actual prejudice. Knight v. United States, 37 F.3d

769, 774 (1st Cir. 1994). Preisel’s only shot at demonstrating cause is through his claim of

ineffective assistance of counsel, but the record evidence does not support that claim.



                                                  7
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 8 of 13                       PageID #: 303



       Preisel’s brief statements at the scene of the investigatory stop regarding the locations of

the firearms were not likely to be found inadmissible as the product of a custodial interrogation

requiring Miranda warnings. The fact that Preisel was detained and not free to leave the scene is

not determinative of whether or not the statements he made were the products of custodial

interrogation. United States v. Quinn, 815 F.2d 153 (1st Cir. 1987). On the other hand, the fact

that the officers had drawn their guns might cause some to view the situation as a formal arrest.

United States v. Trueber, 238 F.3d 79, 93 (1st Cir. 2001) (quoting United States v. Zapata, 18

F.3d 971, 975 (1st Cir. 1994) (“There is no scientifically precise formula that enables courts to

distinguish between investigatory stops . . . and ‘de facto arrests’.”) But given that the police had

credible information from two separate informants that Preisel was in possession of more than

one firearm, the officers drawing their guns and questioning him immediately about the presence

of firearms on his person could well be viewed as a legitimate security measure. United States v.

Chaney, 647 F.3d 401, 409-410 (1st Cir. 2011). The warrantless search of the backpack

inevitably flowed from both the response Preisel gave to the officers and the circumstances

known to the officers based on the informants’ reports.

       According to the prosecution version of the offense, before Preisel gave a full confession

in which he described his drug trafficking activities and named his suppliers, he was

warned of his rights and waived them. Preisel now maintains that it was hours later that he

received those warnings, but at the Rule 11 hearing Preisel did not contest any fact described in

the prosecution version of the offense, including the recounted facts concerning his confession.

Instead, Preisel told the Court that all of the representations in the prosecution version of the

offense were true. See United States v. Butt, 731 F.2d 75, 80 (1st Cir. 1984) (explaining that the

presumption of truthfulness of statements made at Rule 11 hearing is not overcome unless the



                                                  8
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 9 of 13                        PageID #: 304



allegations in the § 2255 petition are sufficient to state a claim of ineffective assistance of

counsel). Preisel admitted to the Rule 11 Court that, before he confessed, he was warned of and

waived his rights. Far from rebutting the accuracy of the Government’s proof—and Preisel’s

admission to the Rule 11 Court—the expanded record confirms that Preisel was warned of his

rights before he confessed. Preisel’s own exhibit at ECF No. 56-7, a page of York County

Sergeant Michael Hayes’s report, explains that, before Preisel was interrogated, Hayes read

Preisel the Miranda warnings. It also verifies that significant time elapsed between the stop on

the street and the actual interrogation, but there is no suggestion anywhere that Preisel was

interrogated during those couple of hours.

       As I read Preisel’s motion, the crux of his current complaint is not that his Miranda rights

were violated, but that he was so intoxicated from his voluntary pre-arrest consumption of

controlled substances that any statements he made were involuntary and should have been

subject to a motion to suppress, even if his Miranda rights were provided prior to questioning. It

is not surprising that competent counsel reviewed the available evidence and determined that a

motion to suppress based on the theory of voluntary intoxication was a nonstarter. The First

Circuit has noted that a suspect arrested in a weakened condition because of his heroin

withdrawal symptoms is not entitled to any presumption that his post-arrest statements were

involuntary. United States v. Palmer, 203 F.3d 55, 61-62 (1st Cir. 2000) (“In the context of the

voluntariness of a confession, a defendant’s mental state by itself and apart from its relation to

official coercion never disposes of the inquiry into constitutional voluntariness.”) In the present

case, as the Government points out, the police reports and all available evidence suggest that

even if Preisel was under the influence, he was sufficiently in control of his faculties to conduct




                                                   9
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 10 of 13                      PageID #: 305



himself in a rational manner. Failing to file a motion to suppress on this record is not ineffective

assistance of counsel.

       It is apparent from Preisel’s own exhibits (ECF No. 56-8) that he and his attorney

discussed the issue of Miranda warnings and the evidence available to the Government on that

score. His confession was not recorded and there apparently was no warnings form available,

although the officers were prepared to testify as described in the prosecution version. Preisel,

even at this late date, offers nothing new on this score and does not deny the existence of the

warnings. Rather he argues about the timing and about his state of intoxication, neither of which

would have led competent counsel to believe that there was a basis to challenge the admissibility

of the statements, as discussed above.

B.     Lies and Coercion by Counsel in the Context of the Guilty Pleas

       Preisel’s complaint with his attorney’s performance regarding the circumstances of his

guilty plea is his assertion that counsel lied, misled him, and coerced him into pleading guilty.

The existing and expanded record show the exact reverse: that at all times trial counsel provided

Preisel with accurate legal advice about the pros and cons of pleading guilty and left the choice

of whether to go to trial entirely up to Preisel. (See Letters of Counsel to Preisel, ECF Nos. 56-2,

56-3, 56-8, 72-2.) Preisel submitted some of these letters in support of his motion and they speak

for themselves. His written submissions do not reveal what lies, threats, or coercion counsel is

alleged to have employed other than the plain language of the letters. The fact that trial counsel

advised Preisel of the downside of going to trial, including the admissibility of his statements and

the complete lack of exculpatory evidence, is not a basis upon which to build a case that counsel

lied or coerced the defendant. Preisel must present something more than vague generalities and

exhibits refuting his contention. United States v. McGill, 11 F.3d 223, 225 (1st Cir. 1993) (“In



                                                 10
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 11 of 13                       PageID #: 306



determining whether the petitioner has carried the devoir of persuasion in this respect, the court

must take many of petitioner’s factual averments as true, but the court need not give weight to

conclusory allegations, self-interested characterizations, discredited inventions, or opprobrious

epithets.”).

        To the extent Preisel currently complains that counsel lied to him that he faced up to life

in prison, the relevant statutes make clear that the advice was correct. Title 21 U.S.C. §

841(b)(1)(A), which was the statute alleged in Count One of the Information, carries a maximum

prison term of life. The same is true of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i), which was specifically

alleged in Count Three. Moreover, the Rule 11 Court informed Preisel that he faced up to life in

prison and the presentence investigator took the same position. Thus, the advice about Preisel’s

sentence exposure was entirely correct. Additionally, counsel correctly advised Preisel about the

likely guideline range for his sentence and also correctly advised him that the only way to escape

the mandatory minimums was to obtain a favorable departure motion from the Government.

Preisel’s current contention that counsel promised him a 40 percent departure is soundly refuted

by the expanded record. Counsel did not lie to Preisel, but merely informed him of the

“inconvenient truths” associated with this criminal prosecution.

C.      Counsel’s Failure to Investigate and/or Familiarize Himself with the Law and Facts

        Preisel’s final volley, allegedly supported by billing records and docket entries, is that

trial counsel was not familiar with the facts or law applicable to his case. The letters mentioned

in the preceding section establish counsel’s familiarity with the relevant statutory provisions and

the nature of the proffer process. Counsel was assigned to a case in which his client had already

made a highly incriminating confession to law enforcement and the confession was most

certainly admissible in evidence. It appears that trial counsel attempted to mitigate the damage



                                                 11
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 12 of 13                       PageID #: 307



and did a good job of doing so, achieving a final sentence 20 percent below the guideline range.

It was not the work of someone unfamiliar with the law and the facts surrounding federal

criminal drug prosecutions.

       Finally, Preisel maintains that his counsel did not conduct an independent investigation in

order to uncover exculpatory evidence. Preisel does not expand upon what this investigation

might have revealed or how it would support a viable defense to drug trafficking charges.

Relying upon gauzy, self-serving allegations about the existence of potentially exculpatory

evidence does not carry the day. David v. United States, 134 F.3d 470, 478 (1st Cir. 1998). If

counsel failed to pursue investigatory leads, Preisel has not provided any material of evidentiary

quality as to what those leads might have been and what sort of investigation counsel might have

conducted.

                                           CONCLUSION

       Based upon the foregoing, Preisel’s Motion to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct his sentence

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255 should be summarily dismissed. I further recommend that a

certificate of appealability should not issue in the event Preisel files a notice of appeal because

there is no substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional right within the meaning of 28

U.S.C. § 2253(c)(2).



                                              NOTICE

               A party may file objections to those specified portions of a magistrate
       judge’s report or proposed findings or recommended decisions entered pursuant to
       28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) for which de novo review by the district court is sought,
       together with a supporting memorandum, within ten (10) days of being served
       with a copy thereof. A responsive memorandum shall be filed within ten (10)
       days after the filing of the objection.




                                                 12
Case 2:08-cr-00178-DBH Document 76 Filed 05/23/12 Page 13 of 13                     PageID #: 308




             Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to de
      novo review by the district court and to appeal the district court’s order.


      May 23, 2012                           /s/Margaret J. Kravchuk
                                             U.S. Magistrate Judge




                                               13
