 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 1 of 20           PageID #: 67



                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                )
                                         )
v.                                       )
                                         )
ANTHONY DAPOLITO,                        ) Criminal no. 2:12-cr-00045-NT
                                         )
                    Defendant.           )



             ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS


      On March 9, 2012, Portland police officers Dan Knight and Richard Ray

stopped and frisked the Defendant, Anthony Dapolito, finding a handgun in his

waistband. The officers arrested the Defendant, and he was charged with

possession of a firearm by a convicted felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).

Before the Court is the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress the handgun. Having

considered the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing held on July 18,

2012, and counsels’ arguments, the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress is GRANTED.

                                        FACTS

      In the early morning of March 9, 2012, Officers Ray and Knight were on

bicycle patrol in Portland. As they cycled past Monument Square at 2:39 a.m., they

noticed the Defendant standing in an alcove in front of Shay’s Grill Pub at 18

Monument Square.

      From the sidewalk looking toward Shay’s, there are two doorways within the

alcove. The first doorway, which is roughly in the center of the alcove, is the
 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 2 of 20            PageID #: 68



entryway for Shay’s. To the right of the Shay’s entrance is a second door allowing

access to condominiums on the upper floors. To the right of the condominium

entrance is a small ATM machine, which is shielded by a canvas enclosure. The

Defendant was standing in the area directly in front of the door to the

condominiums. The officers’ encounter with the Defendant took place in an

approximately six square foot area in front of the doorway to the condominiums.

Their interaction mostly occurred within the area beneath Shay’s awning, but

occasionally spilled out onto the sidewalk immediately in front of 18 Monument

Square.

      The encounter began when the officers cycled by and asked the Defendant

how he was doing. The Defendant responded “everything’s ok,” but he was squinting

and grimacing. Thinking the Defendant’s response was odd, the officers parked

their bikes and approached him. Officer Ray testified that one of the reasons he

wanted to check on the Defendant was because of burglaries in the area. The “area”

was described as most of the downtown and Old Port region of Portland

encompassing Commercial Street, Fore Street, Exchange Street, Congress Street

and Monument Square. Officer Ray could not confirm whether there had been any

burglaries in Monument Square in the past month. Officer Knight testified that he

did not see any evidence that the Defendant had been or would be involved in a

burglary.

      Officer Ray asked the Defendant what he was doing. The Defendant told

Officer Ray that he was waiting for his friends. Officer Ray asked for some




                                          2
 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 3 of 20             PageID #: 69



identification, but the Defendant indicated that he did not have identification on

him. Both Officers Ray and Knight thought that the Defendant was under the

influence of something, although Officer Ray, who did most of the talking with the

Defendant, could not smell any intoxicants. The Defendant seemed nervous. His

face was sweaty and his hands were fidgeting. The Defendant kept grimacing, and

Officer Knight thought that he may have had some sort of facial tic. Officer Ray

testified that the Defendant seemed “off” and that he did not always make sense. At

one point, in an apparent reference to the 18 Monument Square address, the

Defendant told the officers that if you take 100 away from 118 it is 18.

      Officer Ray testified that the Defendant kept looking away from the officers,

and it appeared to Officer Ray that he was trying to get away or leave. In his report,

Officer Ray noted that: “[h]is mannerisms were peculiar starting with the squinting

and grimacing in addition to the nervous fidgeting and looking for an escape route.”

      Neither Officer Ray nor Officer Knight recognized the Defendant, and they

wanted to identify him. Officer Ray asked the Defendant for his name and asked

him to spell it. The Defendant spelled his name D-A-P-L-I-T-O and provided a

middle initial, “M.” Officer Ray also asked for, and the Defendant provided, his

actual birthdate. The Defendant told Officer Ray that he was from Saugus,

Massachusetts. Officer Knight’s report indicates that the Defendant said that he

had a Massachusetts driver’s license. Officer Ray provided dispatch with this

information. Dispatch found no record in either Maine or Massachusetts for

“Anthony M. Daplito.” Officer Ray told the Defendant that dispatch could not find




                                          3
    Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 4 of 20                PageID #: 70



the name and asked the Defendant if he had his name right. The Defendant spelled

his last name again, this time correctly. Officer Ray ran the name by dispatch a

second time. Again, dispatch found no record for the Defendant.1

        Officer Ray testified that he considered it odd that a man in his thirties had

no record of either a driver’s license or state identification card, and that because he

found the absence of any record unusual, he believed that the Defendant was giving

a false name. Officer Ray testified that in his experience, a person with an active

warrant may provide a false name to avoid being arrested. Officer Ray further

testified that he knew that, while odd, the absence of any record for the Defendant

was not enough to detain him.2

        Officer Ray told the Defendant that he thought he was being deceitful and

asked if he could pat him down to find identification. The Defendant refused, telling

the officers that he did not like to be touched. When asked where he lived, the

1       Officer Ray testified that when dispatch runs a name in the computer system it checks for
motor vehicle records as well as National Crime Information Center (NCIC) data, which includes
outstanding warrants, bail conditions, and felony conviction history.
2
        MR. BENEMEN: If he had begun to walk away, isn’t it fair to say that you would have
        stopped and detained him?
        OFFICER RAY: At which point, when he was not on file?
        MR. BENEMAN: At that point, right then and there.
        OFFICER RAY: When he was not on file?
        MR. BENEMAN: Yes.
        OFFICER RAY: No, I couldn’t.
        MR. BENEMAN: You couldn’t?
        OFFICER RAY: We were essentially contacting -- it was suspicious but I couldn’t -- I
        had nothing -- right then I just started talking to him, so no.
        MR. BENEMAN: What changed from the point when dispatch said that he wasn’t on
        file to the point where you decided to detain him?
        OFFICER RAY: His story that he lived there and his friends were coming down and
        told it was about 20 minutes, so he had -- nobody ever showed up, had no key to get
        into the building that he said he lived in, those things, his mannerisms. The location
        of the ATM was a possibility he might have been standing -- trying to do something
        with that.



                                               4
    Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 5 of 20                     PageID #: 71



Defendant responded that he lived at 18 Monument Square with some male

roommates. The Defendant said that he had telephone numbers for his roommates

in his cell phone, but his cell phone was dead so he could not access their numbers.

The Defendant also told the officers that he did not have keys to get into the

building. At one point, Officer Knight pushed the buzzer at number 18, but no one

responded.

        Officer Ray asked a second time if he could search the Defendant for

identification. The Defendant again refused. Officer Ray observed what looked like

a card in the Defendant’s left front pocket and asked him about it. The Defendant

pulled the card out and handed it to Officer Ray. It was a Massachusetts EBT card3

with the name “Anthony Dapolito” on it. Officer Ray testified that he still believed

the Defendant was giving a false name because the EBT card did not have a photo

or date of birth on it.

        At 2:54 a.m., after the officers had been speaking with the Defendant for

about 15 minutes, Officer Christopher Dyer joined Officers Ray and Knight. He

drove his police cruiser onto Monument Square, where vehicles are usually

prohibited, stopped the car, got out, and observed the conversation between the

officers and the Defendant, which, according to Officer Dyer, was not “going

smoothly.” Officer Dyer approached Officers Ray and Knight and the Defendant. He

noted that the Defendant appeared to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol.




3       An Electronic Benefits Transfer card, or EBT card, is a state-issued debit card that is used to
access federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits.


                                                  5
    Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 6 of 20                    PageID #: 72



        Officer Knight testified that because things were not adding up, the officers

decided to detain the Defendant and take him to the county jail in Officer Dyer’s

cruiser in order to get “a little more time” in a safer environment. Officer Ray

testified that at the Cumberland County Jail, the officers could fingerprint the

Defendant or look for him in a tattoo record. Officer Ray told the Defendant that

they were taking him to the county jail to identify him and search him for

identification.4 The Defendant’s eyes grew wider, and he stood up taller. Each of the

officers testified that the Defendant moved into a “bladed” stance, which their

training and experience told them meant that the Defendant was preparing either

to fight or flee. The Defendant turned slightly away from the officers and said that

he “didn’t want that.” He asked the officers if he could take three steps back. Officer

Ray told the Defendant that he could not take three steps back and that they

needed to detain him.5 He told the Defendant to put his hands on his head. When

the Defendant did not comply, Officer Ray repeated the command. Officer Knight



4
       Officer Ray repeatedly testified that his plan was to detain the Defendant to find out who he
was so he could determine if there were any active warrants for him. For example:

        MR. BENEMAN: Your testimony on direct examination was that, because of these
        various concerns that you voiced, you were going to place him in a police car and take
        him to the Cumberland County Jail, correct?
        OFFICER RAY: Yes.
        MR. BENEMAN: What were you going to be arresting him for?
        OFFICER RAY: We were detaining him to positive ID who he was, because of the
        thought -- the belief that he could be wanted and he was being deceitful about that.

        Officer Ray’s incident report also indicated that he wanted to detain the Defendant to
determine his identity: “Due to nothing that he provided us, as to who he was or why he was there
adding up, I deemed it necessary to detain him in order to discover his identity. I believed he could
possibly be a burglar or a wanted person using a fake name to evade capture.”

5      Officer Knight testified that he had never had someone ask to have space before, and this
question indicated to him that the Defendant had a weapon and planned to use it.


                                                  6
 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 7 of 20           PageID #: 73



took out his Taser and trained its red light on the Defendant’s chest. The Defendant

put his hands on his head. Officer Ray held the Defendant’s hands behind his back

and began to pat him down.

      Officer Ray provided conflicting testimony on the purpose of the pat down.

Although his report indicates that he told the Defendant that he was going to detain

him to search for identification, Officer Ray testified that he “miswrote” his

intentions and that he actually intended to search the Defendant for officer safety.

He also testified that the purpose of the search was for “weapons, for safety, to take

him in the car.” Officers Knight and Dyer both testified that the pat down of the

Defendant was for officer safety.

      When the Defendant put his hands on his head, Officer Dyer observed what

looked like the handle of a gun and grabbed the weapon. After the gun — a pistol

loaded with five rounds of ammunition — was found, the officers arrested the

Defendant.

      Officer Dyer transported the Defendant to the Cumberland County Jail. Prior

to the Defendant’s arrest, the officers had questioned him for about 20 minutes.

      At the Cumberland County Jail, the Defendant provided his name, birthdate

and social security number. Dispatch searched for the Defendant in the Interstate

Identification Index, which, for the first time, confirmed his identity and related

that the Defendant is a convicted felon.

                                    DISCUSSION

 I.   Overview of the Law




                                           7
 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 8 of 20            PageID #: 74



      The Fourth Amendment states: “The right of the people to be secure in their

persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures,

shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause . . . .”

U.S. Const. amend. IV. As the First Circuit has explained: “This constitutional

assurance does not prohibit all searches and seizures but, rather, only those that

are unreasonable.” United States v. Pontoo, 666 F.3d 30, 27 (1st Cir. 2011).

      Interactions between the police and citizens generally fall “within three tiers

of Fourth Amendment analysis, depending on the level of police intrusion into a

person’s privacy.” United States v. Young, 105 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1997). The lowest

tier, often called a consensual encounter, does not trigger the protections of the

Fourth Amendment. The middle tier, referred to as an investigative or Terry stop,

see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), allows police to detain an individual briefly but

must be supported by a reasonable, articulable suspicion that the seized individual

is engaged in criminal activity. The third tier of interaction is an arrest or de facto

arrest, which must be supported by probable cause to believe that the suspect has

committed a crime.

      The police do not implicate the Fourth Amendment when they approach

citizens on the street and ask them questions. Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 434

(1991); Young, 105 F.3d at 6. “Police conduct falls short of triggering Fourth

Amendment protections when, from the totality of the circumstances, we determine

that the subject of any police interaction would have felt free to terminate the




                                            8
 Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 9 of 20            PageID #: 75



conversation and proceed along his way.” Young, 105 F.3d at 6 (internal citations

omitted); see Bostick, 105 U.S. at 434.

       “[A] brief investigatory stop based on a reasonable suspicion that criminal

activity may be afoot does not violate the Fourth Amendment, even in the absence

of probable cause.” Pontoo, 666 F.3d at 27. Such an investigatory detention “occurs

when a police officer, acting on reasonable and articulable suspicion of criminal

activity, briefly detains an individual to confirm or dispel his suspicion.” Young, 105

F.3d at 6; see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). In United States v. Brake, 666 F.3d

800 (1st Cir. 2011), the First Circuit explained, “[r]easonable suspicion must be more

than a hunch but need not amount to probable cause. More definitively, the officer

must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the person stopped of

criminal activity, rooted firmly in ‘specific and articulable facts.’” Brake, 666 F.3d at

804 (quoting Pontoo, 666 F.3d at 25-26).

      A two-pronged test must be met for a Terry stop to be valid: 1) “the stop must

be justified at its inception,” and 2) the officers’ actions “must be ‘reasonably related

in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference.’” Pontoo, 666 F.3d at

26 (internal citations omitted) (quoting United States v. Acosta-Colon, 157 F.3d 9,

14 (1st Cir. 1998)). The Court evaluates the “totality of the circumstances” to

determine whether a Terry stop is “justified by some objective manifestation that

the person stopped is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal activity.” United States

v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 41, 417 (1981). See United States v. Camacho, 661 F.3d 718, 726-

27 (1st Cir. 2011) (police, responding to reports of gang fight, lacked reasonable




                                            9
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 10 of 20             PageID #: 76



suspicion to stop two men walking away from fight despite fact that defendant’s

clothing was wet and his breathing labored).

      “[A]n initially consensual encounter between a police officer and a citizen can

be transformed into a seizure or detention within the meaning of the Fourth

Amendment, ‘if, in view of all the circumstances surrounding the incident, a

reasonable person would have believed that he was not free to leave.’” I.N.S. v.

Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 215 (1984) (quoting United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S.

544, 554 (1980)). The line of demarcation between a consensual encounter and an

investigatory detention is drawn at the point where a reasonable person would feel

that they are no longer free to refuse to answer and walk away. See United States v.

Espinoza, 490 F.3d 41, 48-50 (1st Cir. 2007) (defendant seized by officer who walked

up to an idling van containing the defendant, flashed his badge, identified himself

as an immigration officer, asked for identification, and directed the driver to shut

off the engine); United States v. Smith, 423 F.3d 25, 29-30 (1st Cir. 2005) (exiting

cruiser and asking individual for identification did not change a consensual

encounter into an investigatory stop where officers did not touch individual,

question him about a specific event, or use tone of voice indicating that he was

compelled to stay and answer officers’ questions).

      The Supreme Court has addressed the issue of whether the police can insist

on identification on several occasions. “In the ordinary course a police officer is free

to ask a person for identification without implicating the Fourth Amendment,”

Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial Dist. Court of Nev., 542 U.S. 177, 185 (2004), but a police




                                           10
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 11 of 20           PageID #: 77



officer “cannot stop a citizen and demand identification ‘without any specific basis

for believing he is involved in criminal activity.’” United States v. Henderson, 463

F.3d 27, 45 (1st Cir. 2006) (quoting Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 52 (1979)); see

Hiibel, 542 U.S. at 186-87. “[I]f there are articulable facts supporting a reasonable

suspicion that a person has committed a criminal offense, that person may be

stopped in order to detain him, to question him briefly, or to detain him briefly

while attempting to obtain additional information.” Hayes v. Florida, 470 U.S. 811,

816 (1985).

      In Brown, the police stopped a man who was observed walking away from

another man in an alley in an El Paso neighborhood frequented by drug users. The

officers asked Brown for identification. When Brown refused to provide

identification, the police arrested him for violating a Texas statute that requires

individuals who are lawfully stopped by the police to provide a name and address.

The officer acknowledged that he stopped Brown only because he wanted to identify

him. Because the officers lacked any reasonable suspicion to believe that Brown was

engaged in any criminal conduct, the Supreme Court reversed Brown’s conviction.

In so doing, it concluded:

      In the absence of any basis for suspecting appellant of misconduct, the
      balance between the public interest and appellant’s right to personal
      security and privacy tilts in favor of freedom from police interference.
      The Texas statute under which appellant was stopped and required to
      identify himself is designed to advance a weighty social objective in
      large metropolitan centers: prevention of crime. But even assuming
      that purpose is served to some degree by stopping and demanding
      identification from an individual without any specific basis for
      believing he is involved in criminal activity, the guarantees of the
      Fourth Amendment do not allow it. When such a stop is not based on



                                          11
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 12 of 20             PageID #: 78



      objective criteria, the risk of arbitrary and abusive police practices
      exceeds tolerable limits.

Id. at 52 (citation omitted).

      In Hiibel, the Supreme Court held that the police may demand identification

during a lawful Terry stop. The defendant was arrested for obstruction because he

refused to provide his identity to the police during a valid Terry stop. Hiibel argued

that Nevada’s “stop and identify” statute, which requires a person detained by the

police to disclose his identity, violated the Fourth Amendment. The Court

disagreed, rejecting the defendant’s concern that the statute permitted the police to

arrest a person for being suspicious. “Petitioner’s concerns are met by the

requirement that a Terry stop must be justified at its inception and ‘reasonably

related in scope to the circumstances which justified’ the initial stop.’” Id. (quoting

Terry, 392 U.S. at 20).

      In Henderson, the First Circuit addressed a case in which police demanded

identification from a passenger in a car that had been stopped for various driving

infractions. The police officer asked for the passenger’s identification, and when the

passenger said he did not have identification, the officer demanded the passenger’s

name and address. The officer discovered an outstanding warrant and arrested the

passenger on the warrant. During a search incident to arrest, the officer found the

passenger to be in possession of a firearm. The First Circuit found that the driver’s

underlying traffic violation did not “raise the specter of criminal activity” involving

the passenger. Henderson, 463 F.3d at 47. Because the officer did not have




                                           12
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 13 of 20                        PageID #: 79



reasonable and articulable suspicion to detain the passenger,6 the officer’s

investigative detention of the passenger, including his demand of the passenger’s

identification, exceeded the scope of a valid Terry stop. The First Circuit reversed

the trial court’s denial of the suppression motion and vacated the conviction.

           The Fourth Amendment does not permit police officers to base their

reasonable suspicion on a person’s refusal to provide his name or identification.

Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 498 (1983) (during consensual encounter, a person’s

refusal to answer does not, without more, furnish reasonable, objective grounds for

detention).

II.        Application of the Law to the Facts

      A.      When the Terry Stop began.

           In this case, the parties agree that the interaction began as a consensual

encounter and evolved into a Terry stop, but they disagree about when the

transformation occurred, and whether the police had a reasonable articulable

suspicion that the Defendant was engaged in criminal behavior at the inception of

the detention. The Defendant argues that the Terry stop began once the officers had

the Defendant’s correctly spelled name yet continued to question him. The

government argues that the Terry stop began when Officer Ray announced that

they were going to take the Defendant in Officer Dyer’s cruiser to the Cumberland

County Jail.



6       The district court had credited dubious testimony that the officer had asked for identification
because he was going to cite the passenger for failure to wear a seatbelt. The First Circuit held that
the district court’s credibility finding was clearly erroneous.


                                                  13
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 14 of 20           PageID #: 80



      The Defendant was initially approached by two uniformed officers in the

small alcove in front of 18 Monument Square. The Court finds that although the

Defendant was not completely blocked in, his egress was impaired. Officer Ray’s

report, describing the Defendant as “looking for an escape route,” suggests that the

Defendant was somewhat confined.

      While the initial encounter was casual, the interaction intensified after the

Defendant had correctly spelled his name and the dispatcher had relayed the

information that there was no record found. At that point, Officer Ray’s questioning

became accusatory, and Officer Ray told the Defendant that he believed the

Defendant was lying. After about fifteen minutes of questioning, and after the

production of the EBT card did not dispel the officers’ suspicions, it would have been

obvious to any reasonable person that the police were not going to let him go. The

Court finds that the consensual encounter had transformed into an investigatory

detention by this point. By the time Officer Dyer drove his cruiser up onto

Monument Square, increasing further the intensity of the encounter, the Terry stop

had already begun.

      B.     The Police Lacked Reasonable Articulable Suspicion at the
             Inception of the Terry Stop.

      The police did not have “a particularized and objective basis . . . rooted firmly

in ‘specific and articulable facts’” that the Defendant was engaging in criminal

activity at the inception of the Terry stop. Brake, 666 F.3d at 804 (quoting Pontoo,

666 F.3d at 25-26). A Terry stop must be justified at its inception by “some objective

manifestation that the person stopped is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal



                                          14
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 15 of 20             PageID #: 81



activity.” Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417. What the officers had was an odd, grimacing,

impaired man, who was unknown to them and who was not making much sense.

The Defendant was acting not unlike many other members of the indigent and/or

transient population of Portland. The officers suspected that something was “off,”

but they could not put a finger on it. Officer Knight called it “a police sense that

something wasn’t right.” The Court calls it a good hunch.

      The first justification that Officers Ray and Knight provided to support their

stop was that they suspected that the Defendant might be involved in a burglary.

Yet neither officer could identify any burglaries that had occurred in Monument

Square in the month prior to the arrest, much less any burglaries the evening they

encountered the Defendant. There were no tips or sources of information linking the

Defendant to burglaries. The officers saw no tools on or near the Defendant that

would link him to a burglary. Other than standing near an ATM, the Defendant

was doing nothing that suggested that he had committed or was going to commit a

burglary. The burglary justification did not support the Terry stop.

      The second justification offered for the stop was that the officers suspected

that the Defendant was wanted on a warrant and that he was lying about his true

identity. Again, the officers had scant evidence to support their suspicions. The

officers had received no tip or information that the Defendant was wanted. United

States v. Hensley, 469 U.S. 221, 229 (1985) (“wanted flyer” sent to police

departments provided reasonable suspicion that defendant was wanted). The

primary basis for their suspicion was that dispatch could find no record for him.




                                           15
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 16 of 20           PageID #: 82



Officer Ray said that he considered it odd that a man in his thirties had no driver’s

license or state identification card, and he suspected that the Defendant was giving

a false name because he was wanted on an outstanding warrant. But it is clear from

Officer Knight’s report that the Defendant told the officers that he did have a

Massachusetts driver’s license. Rather than delve into the reasons why the system

reported no record when the Defendant said he was licensed in Massachusetts,

Officer Knight assumed the Defendant was lying about his identity. Even after the

point where the Defendant produced an EBT card in the name of Anthony Dapolito,

Officer Ray persisted with his theory that the Defendant was wanted on an

outstanding warrant.

       The Government points to the fact that the Defendant misspelled his own

name when first asked. But given the description by the officers of the Defendant’s

condition, the Court cannot infer that he deliberately misspelled his name to shield

his true identity, particularly since, when asked a second time, he spelled his name

correctly and he turned over an EBT card in the name of Anthony Dapolito. Given

these facts, the Court concludes that it is more likely that the Defendant either

unintentionally misspelled his name the first time or that Officer Ray misheard

him.

       There was also some testimony that the use of a middle initial “M” might

have thrown off the record search. Officer Ray testified that the Defendant did not

have the middle initial “M” on records he reviewed post-arrest. But, Officer Ray did

not indicate which records he reviewed, and there was no other evidence offered of




                                          16
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 17 of 20            PageID #: 83



whether the Defendant has a middle name or what his middle initial is. Nor was

there any evidence of the sophistication of the search engines used by dispatch or

whether they required letter-for-letter accuracy. The fact that dispatch found no

record of the Defendant, even coupled with his odd behavior and his implausible

account of where he lived, did not constitute a particularized and objective basis for

suspecting that the Defendant was wanted on an outstanding warrant.

      The police articulated no other suspicion than generalized suspicion and

unsupported suspicions of burglary and an outstanding warrant. The officers

observed no criminal behavior and had no tips or sources of information notifying

them that the Defendant was engaging in any other crime. The officers saw no

contraband and no indication of a weapon. Although the Defendant seemed jumbled

and impaired, he was apparently not behaving in a way that would warrant an

arrest for public intoxication, disorderly conduct, loitering, or trespass. The

Defendant’s story that he lived with friends in a condominium at 18 Monument

Square was not adding up, but the police had noted that the Defendant was not

making much sense in general. Even if the story was not truthful, the Government

made no claim that such a false statement would be criminal. Under the totality of

the circumstances and viewed through the lens of a reasonable police officer, the

Court cannot find that the police had a particularized and objective basis grounded

in specific and articulable facts that the Defendant had been, was, or was about to

be engaged in criminal activity.




                                           17
    Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 18 of 20                     PageID #: 84



         Officer Ray’s report and the officers’ testimony make clear that the officers’

primary goal was to identify the Defendant. The officers were prepared to pat down,

handcuff, and transport the Defendant to the jail in order to continue their search

for identification.7 But Brown and Hiibel make clear that the police cannot demand

identification unless they have a reasonable, articulable suspicion of criminal

activity to support a Terry stop in the first place. The officers’ continued

determination to identify the Defendant was, absent any additional basis for

suspecting the Defendant of involvement in criminal activity, insufficient to justify

a Terry stop.

         C.     The Scope of the Stop

         “After a valid Terry stop, a police officer may conduct a protective frisk or pat-

down search if ‘the officer is justified in believing that the person is armed and

dangerous to the officer or others.’” Camacho, 661 F.3d at 728 (quoting United

States v. Romain, 393 F.3d 63, 71 (1st Cir. 2004) (quoting United States v. Schiavo,

29 F.3d 6, 8 (1st Cir. 1994) (internal quotation marks omitted)). The stop must also

be “reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the

interference.” United States v. Acosta-Colon, 157 F.3d 9, 14 (1st Cir. 1998). Because

7
         Government counsel argued that the police, as part of a Terry stop, may handcuff a suspect
and take him to the police station or the jail to verify his identity. In support of this argument, the
Government cited United States v. Dingle-Jones, Crim. No. 08-202-P-H, 2009 WL 230093 (D. Me.
Jan. 30, 2009). The Court believes that Dingle-Jones should be strictly limited to its facts, and notes
that in Dingle-Jones the court found probable cause for an arrest. Generally a non-consensual trip to
the police station would constitute an arrest that would require the police to have probable cause
that the suspect has committed a crime. Hayes, 470 U.S. at 816 (“our view continues to be that the
line is crossed when the police, without probable cause or a warrant, forcibly remove a person from
his home or other place in which he is entitled to be and transport him to the police station, where he
is detained, although briefly, for investigative purposes. We adhere to the view that such seizures, at
least where not under judicial supervision, are sufficiently like arrests to invoke the traditional rule
that arrests may constitutionally be made only on probable cause.”)


                                                  18
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 19 of 20            PageID #: 85



the Court finds that the Terry stop was not supported by reasonable articulable

suspicion at its inception, it need not address whether the officers’ actions were

reasonably related in scope to the circumstances that justified the interference or

whether the frisk of the Defendant was justified by a concern for officer safety.

Terry, 392 U.S. at 24; Brake, 666 F.3d at 804 (pat-down frisk must be grounded on

specific, articulable facts).

       D.     Suppression of the Handgun

       Evidence found as a direct or indirect result of invalid police conduct may not

be used unless it is discovered “by means sufficiently distinguishable to be purged of

the primary taint,” Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 485 (1963), or “the

connection between the illegal police conduct and the discovery and seizure of the

evidence is ‘so attenuated as to dissipate the taint.’” Segura v. United States, 468

U.S. 796, 805 (1984) (quoting Nardone v. United States, 308 U.S. 338, 341 (1990)).

In Camacho, the First Circuit held that a gun found during a frisk conducted after

an invalid stop should be suppressed, regardless of whether the officer reasonably

believed the suspect posed a threat to the officer’s safety, because the frisk flowed

directly from the invalid stop. Id. at 728 (“Discovery of the gun flowed directly from

the original unlawful seizure of Camacho and was not ‘so attenuated as to dissipate

the taint’ of the initial unlawful stop.”). See also Arizona v. Johnson, 555 U.S. 323,

326 (2009).

       The officers’ frisk of the Defendant and the discovery of the gun was the

direct result of the invalid Terry stop. There was no intervening time or conduct




                                           19
Case 2:12-cr-00045-NT Document 33 Filed 08/21/12 Page 20 of 20             PageID #: 86



that could dissipate the taint of the invalid Terry stop from the frisk of the

Defendant and discovery of the gun or provide an independent basis for discovering

the gun. The handgun found during the officers’ frisk of the Defendant is a fruit of

the invalid Terry stop and should be suppressed.

                                     CONCLUSION

      For the reasons stated above, the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress is hereby

GRANTED.

      SO ORDERED.

      Dated this 21st day of August, 2012.

                                                  /s/ Nancy Torresen
                                                  United States District Judge




                                             20
