Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 1 of 21         PageID #: 215



                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
                   v.                  )
                                       ) Docket no. 2:12-cr-0065-NT
BRUNEL CONSTANT                        )
                                       )


                            OPINION AND ORDER
                          ON MOTIONS TO SUPPRESS

      Defendant Brunel Constant (“Defendant”) is charged with possession of a

firearm by a convicted felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). This case comes

before the Court on Defendant’s motions to suppress both the firearm recovered by

police under a porch eave and witness identifications of the Defendant. For the

reasons discussed below, the Defendant’s motion to suppress the firearm (ECF No.

30) is DENIED and his motion to suppress witness identifications (ECF No. 29) is

GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

                              FINDINGS OF FACT

      The charge against the Defendant arises out of a shooting incident that

occurred in the pre-dawn hours of August 19, 2011 outside a three-story, six-unit

apartment building on Walnut Street in Lewiston, Maine. The Walnut Street

apartment building contained two apartments on each floor. The pertinent

residents of the building were Alan Roy and his girlfriend, Tanya Chickering, who

lived in one of the apartments on the third floor; Roy’s mother, Jeannette Cloutier,

and his sister, Nancy Cote, who lived in one of the first floor apartments; and

Ronald Coleman, who lived in the other first floor apartment.
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 2 of 21         PageID #: 216



      On the night in question, Roy was with his friend Adam Dennis. The two had

finished work, purchased beer, and spent the evening hanging out on Walnut

Street. At about 4:00 a.m., Dennis was preparing to head home when he noticed a

man sleeping on the back porch of Jeanette Cloutier and Nancy Cote’s apartment.

Dennis woke the man, intending to get him to move along, and an argument

ensued.

      During the argument, the man mentioned something about Nancy owing him

money. Dennis and the man moved from Cloutier’s back porch through a lighted

hallway to the front porch. After several minutes of arguing, the man departed. Roy

witnessed the argument but did get involved. Ronald Coleman, who was inside his

first floor apartment, did not observe the encounter but heard a man yell certain

expletives and claim that he would be back.

      After the man left, Roy returned to his apartment and Dennis went home.

Shortly thereafter, still prior to dawn, Roy was eating a bowl of chili when he heard

shouting outside. Roy took a brief look out of his window and saw that the man who

had been on his mother’s porch had returned. Not wanting to get involved, Roy

retreated into his apartment, and moments later he heard, but did not see, gun

shots. Dennis, who was home by the time of the shooting, testified that Roy called

him to let him know that the man from the argument had returned with a gun.

      The man fired two shots from the street toward the front of Cloutier’s

apartment. Coleman heard the first shot and looked out his front window in time to

see a blaze from the gun as the second shot was fired. Based on the repercussion



                                         2
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 3 of 21          PageID #: 217



from the shot, the fire length, the lack of a sound of casings hitting the street, and

his knowledge of guns, Coleman surmised that the gun was a revolver. Coleman

observed that the shooter was aimed at Cloutier’s apartment, and he saw the

shooter turn and walk away after firing the second shot. Coleman did not see the

shooter’s face, but he observed that the shooter was a black man with long

dreadlocks wearing a white tank top.

      Later that morning, Lewiston Police Department Officer Derrick St. Laurent

picked up the investigation of the shooting. Officer St. Laurent’s1 supervisor

provided an initial description of the shooter as a black male with dreadlocks and

wearing a white tank top. Officer St. Laurent spoke with Cloutier, who did not

witness the shooting but who was woken up by the shots to her residence, and he

also interviewed Roy and Chickering.

      Roy claimed to recognize the man who had been on his mother’s porch as

someone he had seen around Lewiston, but whose name he did not know. After

making some inquiries, Roy contacted Officer St. Laurent and told him that the

man was called “Jamal” and that he lived with a girl named Temesha on Bradley

Street between Pine and Ash Streets. Officer St. Laurent canvassed that area and

learned that a man fitting the description lived with his girlfriend in a second-floor

apartment at a particular building on Bradley Street.

      Officer St. Laurent and three other officers, Special Agent Douglas Kirk,

Detective James Theiss, and Detective Roland Godbout, approached the apartment

building together. Special Agent Kirk testified that he a mailbox marked “Temesha

1     Officer titles are retained to identify government actors.

                                                 3
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 4 of 21                       PageID #: 218



Blackwell.” The officers rang the bell to Blackwell’s apartment, but nothing

happened. Some neighbors told the officers that the tenants generally entered their

apartment through the entrance around the back.

       The two-story building contained at least two apartments.2 The apartments

had front doors on the first floor and back doors which exited onto a second floor

porch that led to a set of wooden stairs down the back side of the building. Detective

Godbout initially remained outside of the front of the Bradley Street building while

Officer St. Laurent, Special Agent Kirk and Detective Theiss climbed the wooden

staircase attached to the back of the building that led to the back doors of both

apartments.

       As the officers approached the second floor landing, a black man with long

dreadlocks wearing a white tank top emerged from one of the apartment doors.

Officer St. Laurent, who was first up the stairs, greeted the man, and the man

asked him what was going on. Officer St. Laurent asked the man if anyone else was

in the apartment, and the man answered that his girlfriend was inside sleeping on

the couch. Officer St. Laurent asked if the man minded if he spoke with her; the

man said “no,” and Officer St. Laurent then entered the apartment. By this time,

Detective Godbout had come around from the front, and he entered the apartment

along with Officer St. Laurent, while Special Agent Kirk and Detective Theiss stood

with the man on the back stairway.

2      Blackwell’s testimony about the layout of the building is confusing. Blackwell described her
apartment as an area by the front door on the first floor which leads to a stairway to her apartment.
She stated that next to her on the second floor was another apartment, but she did not know
whether that apartment also had living space on the first floor. It is possible that there was a third
apartment on the first floor.

                                                  4
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 5 of 21         PageID #: 219



      Detective Theiss conversed with the man on the back porch and eventually

succeeded in obtaining a Massachusetts identification listing the man as the

Defendant, Brunel Constant. Detective Theiss called the Defendant’s name in to a

dispatcher and learned that there was a warrant out for the Defendant’s arrest.

Detective Theiss and Special Agent Kirk placed the Defendant under arrest and

waited for other officers to arrive to transport the Defendant back to the police

department. Approximately 15 to 20 minutes elapsed from the first encounter with

the Defendant until he was taken to the police station.

      The police did not reveal to the Defendant that they were investigating a

shooting and looking for a gun. Special Agent Kirk testified that once they found out

that there was a warrant for the Defendant’s arrest, they knew that taking the

Defendant to the police station would allow the investigators a better opportunity to

talk to the Defendant. Officer St. Laurent testified that he did not tell the

Defendant that they were looking for a gun because he wanted the nature of their

investigation to be a surprise to the Defendant at any subsequent interrogation.

      While Detective Theiss and Special Agent Kirk were speaking with the

Defendant outside, Officer St. Laurent and Detective Godbout went inside and

talked to the Defendant’s girlfriend, Temesha Blackwell. Blackwell told Officer St.

Laurent and Detective Godbout that she lived in the apartment with her son and

that the Defendant was a boyfriend from Boston who occasionally stayed with her.

Blackwell stated that when the Defendant did stay over, he slept on the couch or

with her. Detective Theiss testified that he asked who was on the lease, and



                                          5
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 6 of 21         PageID #: 220



Blackwell said that it was just her. Blackwell gave consent to search the apartment.

She testified that she did not have a problem with the search because she had

nothing to hide. The officers searched the apartment and Detective Theiss

ultimately found a revolver outside the apartment in the rafters on the back porch.

      Blackwell admitted at the suppression hearing that she did not tell the

officers that she had moved into the apartment with the Defendant approximately

two months prior or that he had paid the both the security deposit and the rent on

the apartment since that time.

      After the Defendant’s arrest, Officer St. Laurent asked Detective Wayne

Clifford to put together a photo array with the Defendant’s photograph. Detective

Clifford provided Officer St. Laurent with a photographic array containing six

pictures. All of the individuals depicted in the array are black men with dreadlocks,

and all appear to be approximately between the ages of 18 and 40. The Defendant,

however, is the only individual in the array with dreadlocks extending well below

his shoulders. The Defendant is also the only individual in the array wearing a

white tank top. The other individuals all have short dreadlocks and either orange or

white tops with sleeves. One of the men is also significantly more heavyset than the

others. Detective Clifford admitted that he had difficulty compiling the array

because there were only five black men with dreadlocks in his database. These men

then became the other individuals in the photographic array.

      Officer St. Laurent presented this array to Adam Dennis, Alan Roy, Nancy

Cote, and Ronald Coleman. Dennis viewed the array the afternoon following the



                                         6
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 7 of 21                      PageID #: 221



shooting and identified the Defendant as the man with whom he had argued on

Cloutier’s porch. At the suppression hearing, Dennis recalled having no difficulty

identifying the Defendant at the time the array was presented to him. Roy at first

picked out another individual’s photo, but then chose the Defendant’s photo because

he recognized his face. Roy identified the Defendant’s photo as the man he had seen

on his mother’s porch earlier that morning and then back at his mother’s apartment

again moments before the shooting.3 Although Nancy Cote did not witness any of

the events surrounding the shooting, she was shown the array and pointed out the

Defendant as her friend Jamal. Cote testified at the suppression hearing that she

did owe the Defendant money.

       Due to an oversight, Coleman was not presented with the array until five

months after the shooting, at a time when he was in the hospital. Coleman picked

out the Defendant’s photo without hesitation and evinced certainty in his

identification of the Defendant. At the suppression hearing, however, Coleman

stated that he actually was not sure of the identification because he had not seen

the shooter’s face. Coleman stated that he picked out the Defendant’s photo because

the braids were the same length as the shooter’s braids and because he was wearing

a white tank top like the shooter. Coleman also understood at the time he viewed

the photos that the police had found their man.



3        Officer St. Laurent testified that he believed that Adam Dennis might have had some
difficulty picking out the Defendant, and described Dennis first choosing between two photos, but
then settling on the Defendant’s photo. He also testified that Alan Roy had no difficulty picking out
the Defendant’s photo from the lineup. It appears that Officer St. Laurent may have confused Dennis
and Roy, both of whom had viewed the array on the same afternoon. The Court credits the testimony
of Roy and Dennis in this regard.

                                                 7
    Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 8 of 21                     PageID #: 222



                                           DISCUSSION

         A. Suppression of the Firearm

         The Defendant contends that the firearm recovered by the police during their

August 19, 2011 search of the Bradley Street apartment should be suppressed

because the search violated his Fourth Amendment rights. The Court credits

Blackwell’s testimony that the Defendant rented the apartment and lived in it with

her. The Defendant therefore had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the

apartment. However, both because Blackwell permitted the search, and because the

gun was found outside on a porch accessed by more than one apartment, the search

was valid and the fruits of that search will not be suppressed.

                1.      Consent

         There is no violation of the Fourth Amendment’s4 prohibition against

unreasonable searches and seizures where a person with authority over the

property voluntarily consents to a search. See Georgia v. Randolph, 547 U.S. 103,

109 (2006) (citing Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 181 (1990)). A co-occupant

may consent to a search of the suspect’s premises when the suspect is absent.

Randolph, 547 U.S. at 109 (citing United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164, 170

(1974)). But the consent of a co-occupant is not valid when a co-occupant suspect is

also present and objects to the search. Randolph, 547 U.S. at 115. Consent of a co-

occupant may also not be valid if the police purposefully remove the suspect from

the premises for the sake of avoiding an objection. See id. at 121.

4
        The Fourth Amendment provides: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated . . .”
U.S. Const. amend. IV.

                                                   8
    Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 9 of 21                PageID #: 223



         The Defendant argues that the police purposefully removed him from the

premises so that he could not object to the search. The testimony does not support

the Defendant’s claim. Although the police admitted that they did not want to begin

their search while the Defendant was present, Officer St. Laurent explained that

this was because they wanted the nature of the investigation to be a surprise to the

Defendant at any subsequent interrogation. Special Agent Kirk testified that once

the police knew that there was an outstanding warrant for the Defendant’s arrest,

they were anxious to secure him and bring him to the police station, which was a

more favorable location for an interview.

         Officer St. Laurent also testified that he did not ask the Defendant for

permission to search the premises because he understood that the apartment

belonged solely to Blackwell and he understood the Defendant to be an occasional

overnight houseguest. Blackwell admitted at the suppression hearing that she

understated the Defendant’s interest in the apartment when she spoke with the

police. Blackwell told the police that the Defendant was a boyfriend from Boston

who stayed with her occasionally and either slept on the couch or with her. St.

Laurent reasonably relied on Blackwell’s statements. The Court is aware that even

if he were merely a houseguest, the Defendant may have been able to withhold

consent over portions of the apartment where he kept his personal belongings.

Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 99 (1990).5 But the fact that Officer St. Laurent


5
        Olson held that houseguests have a legitimate expectation of privacy in the temporary
quarters provided by a host. The Court does not here take on the question of whether or the degree
to which a houseguest can withhold consent in the face of a host who consents to a search of the
host’s premises.

                                                9
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 10 of 21         PageID #: 224



believed that the Defendant had no right to object to the search of the apartment

does support the Government’s claim that the police were not trying to remove the

Defendant for the purpose of depriving him of an opportunity to object to the search.

      The Court finds that the decision to seek Blackwell’s consent to search only

after the Defendant had been removed was motivated by legitimate law

enforcement interests in both securing the premises and preserving a tactical

advantage in any later interrogation. Because the police were not removing the

Defendant from the premises “for the sake of avoiding a possible objection,” the

search was reasonable. See Randolph, 547 U.S. at 121.

             2.    No Reasonable Expectation of Privacy

      A defendant bears the burden of establishing that “his own Fourth

Amendment rights were violated by the challenged search or seizure.” United States

v. Rheault, 561 F.3d 55, 58-59 (1st Cir. 2009) (quoting Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S.

128, 131 n.1 (1978)). This requires a defendant to establish that he had a legitimate

expectation of privacy in the place searched. The Supreme Court follows “a two-part

test for analyzing the expectation question: first, whether the movant has exhibited

an actual, subjective, expectation of privacy; and second, whether such subjective

expectation is one that society is prepared to recognize as objectively reasonable.”

Rheault, 561 F.3d at 59. (citing Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735, 740 (1979)).

      The gun was discovered in the rafters on the back porch. Blackwell testified

that she and the Defendant were the only tenants who used the back porch. Defense

counsel has argued that because this area was used exclusively by Blackwell and



                                         10
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 11 of 21        PageID #: 225



the Defendant and was not used by the occupants of the other second floor

apartment, the Defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy there.

      The Court disagrees. Blackwell testified that she knew that the other door off

the back porch went to another apartment in the building. Blackwell and the

Defendant had been living in the apartment for less than two months. Although

Blackwell testified that she never saw occupants from the other apartment enter

from the back door or use the porch, this does not confer exclusive control over the

porch to Blackwell and the Defendant. There is no evidence that Blackwell and the

Defendant had a right to exclude other tenants from the back porch, and they

therefore had no reasonable expectation of privacy therein.

      Additionally, there was no gate barring access up the back stairs to the back

porch or any signage directing people to keep out. Because the area in question is

both open to the public and potentially shared by occupants of the second

apartment, the Court finds that any subjective expectation of privacy is not

objectively reasonable. Neither can the back entryway and porch be considered part

of the curtilage of the Defendant’s apartment. “In a modern urban multi-family

apartment house, the area within the ‘curtilage’ is necessarily much more limited

than in the case of a rural dwelling subject to one owner’s control. In such an

apartment house, a tenant’s ‘dwelling’ cannot reasonably be said to extend beyond

his own apartment and perhaps any separate areas subject to his exclusive control.”

United States v. Cruz Pagan, 537 F.2d 554, 558 (1st Cir. 1976) (citing

Commonwealth v. Thomas, 267 N.E. 2d 489, 491 (1970)); see also United States v.



                                         11
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 12 of 21         PageID #: 226



Brown, 169 F.3d 89, 92 (1st Cir. 1999) (no reasonable expectation of privacy in

apartment building lobby); United States v. Hawkins, 139 F.3d 29, 32-33 (1st Cir.

1998) (no reasonable expectation of privacy in unenclosed shared basement of

apartment building).

      Both because valid consent to search was given and because, in any event,

the gun was found in an area in which the Defendant lacked a legitimate

expectation of privacy, the Defendant’s motion to suppress the firearm is denied.

      B. Suppression of Witness Identifications

      The Defendant contends that the six-photo array that was shown to the

witnesses was impermissibly suggestive and tainted the witness identifications of

him in violation of his right to due process of law. The Government denies that the

array was unnecessarily suggestive and argues that even if the array were to be

considered unnecessarily suggestive, the witness identifications were all sufficiently

reliable so as to allow their admission.

      The Supreme Court has allowed identifications even in cases where only one

photograph has been shown to a witness or where a single suspect is brought before

a victim for identification if circumstances made such a procedure necessary or

there was a sufficient showing that the identification was nonetheless reliable. See

Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98, 114-116 (1977) (single photo shown to

undercover narcotics officer was unnecessarily suggestive but admissible because

identification was otherwise reliable where officer saw drug dealer for several

minutes in good light, provided a thorough description, and was certain about his



                                           12
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 13 of 21         PageID #: 227



identification); Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 198-200 (1972) (single suspect brought

before victim was unnecessarily suggestive but identification was reliable because

victim saw assailant for considerable period of time under adequate lighting,

provided a detailed description before the “show-up,” and had no doubt about her

identification); Simmons v. United States, 390 U.S. 377, 380-86 (1968) (snapshots of

bank robbery suspect shown to tellers was not an ideal identification procedure but

was “not so impermissibly suggestive as to give rise to a very substantial likelihood

of irreparable misidentification”); Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 302 (1967) (single

suspect “show-up” at victim’s hospital bedside was suggestive but necessary given

concern that victim might die).

      “An out-of-court identification based on a photo array must be suppressed as

a matter of due process ‘only if the photographic identification procedure was so

impermissibly suggestive as to give rise to a very substantial likelihood of

misidentification.’” United States v. Holliday, 457 F.3d 121, 125 (1st Cir. 2006)

(quoting Biggers, 409 U.S. at 197). The analysis proceeds in two steps: (1)

determining whether the array was impermissibly suggestive; and (2) if the array

was impermissibly suggestive, determining whether the witness’s identification was

nevertheless sufficiently reliable under the totality of the circumstances to be

allowed into evidence. Holliday, 457 F.3d at 125 (citing United States v. Henderson,

320 F.3d 92, 100 (1st Cir. 2003)). “The standard being applied is meant to screen out

only evidence that is clearly unreliable and not to supplant the jury’s ordinary

function of weighing what the witness says and choosing the weight to accord it. It



                                         13
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 14 of 21          PageID #: 228



is for this reason that ‘it is only in extraordinary cases that identification evidence

should be withheld from the jury.’” United States v. Jones, 689 F.3d 12, 18 (1st Cir.

2012) (quoting United States v. de Jesus-Rios, 990 F.2d 672, 677 (1st Cir. 1993)).

                1. Unnecessarily Suggestive

      In determining whether an array is unnecessarily suggestive, the Court must

consider both the suggestiveness of the array and whether there was a good reason

for law enforcement’s failure to resort to less suggestive procedures. See Holliday,

457 F.3d at 125. The array at issue was comprised of six photographs. Among the

six photographs put before the witnesses, only the Defendant’s photo depicted an

individual with long dreadlocks and wearing a white tank top, the very features of

the suspect’s appearance described to the police by the witnesses prior to the

apprehension of the Defendant. While the other five men were also black males

roughly the same age as the Defendant, their dreadlocks were significantly shorter

and less thick than the Defendant’s. In addition, only the Defendant was wearing a

white tank top. Two of the other men wore white t-shirts, and three of the men wore

orange shirts, presumably prison-issued.

      The Lewiston police were investigating an armed individual who fired two

shots into an occupied apartment in a residential neighborhood. Although the crime

was serious, the police were fairly confident that the Defendant was the shooter,

and he was in their custody on an outstanding warrant. While the police

understandably wanted to confirm their suspicions as soon as possible with the

witness identifications, they did not have the same time pressures as are present



                                           14
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 15 of 21                     PageID #: 229



when a dangerous suspect is at large or a victim is dying. Detective Clifford, the

officer who put together the line-up, testified that he had trouble finding

photographs of other individuals with long dreadlocks and he was limited by the

small size of the database. There was no testimony as to why he could not have gone

outside of his limited database for pictures.6

       In an unpublished opinion and using the highly deferential standard of

review for habeas cases, the First Circuit assessed the constitutionality of a photo

array which contained only one light-haired suspect among five dark-haired

individuals. Johnson v. Dickhaut, 308 F. App’x 454 (1st Cir. 2009). The victim had

previously described the suspect as having strawberry blond hair. Pointing out that

some identifications are single photographs or single show-ups, the Court stated

that there is “no requirement to include a certain number of ‘filler’ photographs in

an array.” Id. at 457 (citing Brathwaite, 432 U.S. at 117). Compare United States v.

Fletcher, 121 F.3d 187, 194 (5th Cir. 1997) (six-photo array in which the defendant

was the only individual wearing a suit and tie as described by the witness was not

impermissibly suggestive), abrogated on other grounds as recognized by United

States v. Robinson, 367 F.3d 278, 286 n. 11 (5th Cir. 2004), with United States v. El

Tayib, 88 F.3d 157, 166 (2d Cir. 1996) (“One would think that if a suspect is

described only in terms of one characteristic, the filler photos in an array would also

portray people having that characteristic. Otherwise, there may be no real

6
        The Government suggested at oral argument that the background for non-local photos would
not have been the same as the backgrounds for the six photos featured in the array, or that other
photos might contain placards identifying the photo as having been taken out-of-state. The photos in
this array contain either an undifferentiated white background or a white concrete-block background
and the individuals are depicted without placards.

                                                15
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 16 of 21                PageID #: 230



identification, just a witness with the wit to suppose that the one suspect with the

salient characteristic must be the person suspected by the authorities.”)

       The First Circuit has noted that the duty to match highly unusual aspects of

a suspect’s appearance is limited: “The police are not required to search for identical

twins.’” Holliday, 457 F.3d at 126 n.5 (quoting Wright v. State, 175 N.W.2d 646, 652

(Wis. 1970)). In Holliday the defendant had such unusual facial pigmentation that

it would have been nearly impossible to find filler photographs which were similar

to the suspect. Holliday, 457 F.3d at 126.

       In this case, because the witnesses described certain features of a suspect and

were presented with only one picture containing those specific characteristics, the

Court finds that the array was suggestive. Long dreadlocks, unlike unique facial

pigmentation, are not so unusual that images of individuals with them could not

have been found. With today’s technology, it should be possible for police

departments to reach outside of the confines of their own limited databases and get

images from other sources, either through the internet or other police databases.7

Furthermore, the police could have cropped out the Defendant’s white tank top or

photographed the Defendant in a different shirt. Also, since the prime suspect was

in custody, the police had enough time to put together a less suggestive array.

Because the Defendant has met its burden of establishing that the procedure was

unnecessarily suggestive, the Court            will proceed to assess whether             the

identifications were nevertheless reliable.

7
        As to the Government’s argument that many mug shots show arrestees with placards that
identify the department, it should be possible to crop or block out the text of a placard with
inexpensive photograph editing software.

                                             16
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 17 of 21          PageID #: 231



             2.     Reliability

      To determine whether the witnesses’ identifications were reliable, the Court

considers the factors described in Biggers: the opportunity of the witness to view the

criminal at the time of the crime, the witness’s degree of attention, the accuracy of

his prior description of the criminal, the level of certainty demonstrated at the

confrontation, and the time between the crime and the confrontation. United States

v. Bouthot, 878 F.2d 1506, 1514 (1st Cir. 1989), (citing Biggers, 409 U.S. at 199-200),

abrogated on other grounds by Perry v. New Hampshire, 132 S. Ct. 716 (2012). The

government bears the burden in this part of the analysis, Jones, 689 F.3d at 17

(citing Brathwaite, 432 U.S. at 109-14). The Court proceeds separately as to each

witness.

                    a. Ronald Coleman

      Coleman was in his apartment on the first floor of the Walnut Street

apartment building. It was very early in the morning, and he had the television on

and was drinking coffee trying to wake up. Coleman heard a verbal altercation

outside. He looked out but did not see anything and went on about his business.

Shortly thereafter, a gunshot grabbed his attention. Coleman looked out the window

in time to see a second shot fired into his next-door neighbor’s apartment. Coleman

testified that although it was still dark outside, he was able to see a black man fire

the gun, turn, and walk away from the apartment. Coleman testified that he saw

the shooter for only seconds, and he had no opportunity to view the shooter’s face.

Coleman described the shooter as a black man of approximately his own height,



                                          17
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 18 of 21         PageID #: 232



build, and age with long braids wearing a white tank top. To the extent that he

could see, Coleman was an attentive witness. He was particularly attentive to the

type of firearm used.

      Five months had passed between the shooting and the Government’s

presentation of the array to Coleman. Although his condition was not critical,

Coleman was in the hospital at the time the police showed him the lineup. Coleman

evinced certainty in his choice of the Defendant when he was presented with the

lineup. This apparent certainty, however, was undermined by Coleman’s assertions

at the suppression hearing that he picked the Defendant out of the lineup because

he was the only one who had long braids. Coleman testified that he understood that

the police had already arrested the shooter, and he appeared to infer that, therefore,

the shooter was in the lineup. Coleman testified at the suppression hearing that he

would not be able to identify the shooter if he saw him again, and that he picked the

Defendant’s photo because he did not want to be “bad.”

      Under the totality of the circumstances, Coleman’s out-of-court identification

was not reliable and must be suppressed. Because the out-of-court identification

would taint any in-court identification, the Court will not allow Coleman to make an

in-court identification of the Defendant at trial.

                    b. Adam Dennis

      Dennis did not witness the shooting, but he was involved in the altercation

with the man sleeping on Cloutier’s porch shortly before the shooting. The man

grew angry during the altercation, and Dennis observed him at close range, face-to-



                                           18
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 19 of 21         PageID #: 233



face, for five to ten minutes. At one point, Dennis followed the man through a well-

lit hall out to the front entrance of the building. Although Dennis had been drinking

beer throughout the evening, there was no indication that he was significantly

impaired, and the fact that Dennis and the man argued was likely to have

heightened Dennis’s attention. Dennis described the man with whom he argued as

a large black man with long dreadlocks wearing pants, a shirt, and a hat. Dennis

was shown the lineup the same day as the altercation, and he was certain when he

selected the Defendant’s photograph that he was the man with whom he had

argued. Altogether, there are enough indicia of reliability to admit Dennis’s

identification into evidence.

                    c. Alan Roy

      Roy observed the man arguing with Dennis for about fifteen minutes.

Although some of that argument took place on the dark back porch, Roy testified

that the man walked right by him when he passed through the lighted hallway. Roy

testified that he had previously seen the man around the city, although he did not

know him by name. Roy testified that a while after the man had left, Roy heard

yelling outside the apartment and that he went to his third floor apartment window

to see what was going on. Roy testified that he saw the same person who had been

sleeping on his mother’s porch and who had been arguing with Dennis. Roy, who

wanted nothing to do with the situation, turned away from the window and

moments later heard shots.




                                         19
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 20 of 21                     PageID #: 234



       As far as his degree of attention, Roy acknowledged that he had consumed

seven or eight beers over the course of the evening,8 and he also testified that he

was having his own argument with his girlfriend during Dennis’s altercation with

the suspect. Roy described the man as a black male with dreadlocks.

       As Officer St. Laurent started to show the photographs in the array, Roy

identified the first photograph set down, which was of another individual. Officer

St. Laurent told Roy to wait until all the photos were displayed, and only then did

Roy point to the Defendant’s picture. Roy said he ultimately settled on the

Defendant’s photo because he recognized the Defendant’s face. Roy affirmed that

the Defendant was the man he had seen around town, the individual he had seen on

his mother’s porch, and the person who came back to his mother’s apartment just

before the shooting. Roy was shown the photo array the afternoon following the

incident while his memory of the events was still fresh.

       Although Roy presents a close call, the Court finds that his identification

does not give rise to a substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification. The

Court keeps in mind the First Circuit’s admonition that “it is only in extraordinary

cases that identification evidence should be withheld from the jury,” and concludes

that Roy’s identification has enough indicia of reliability that it should be presented

to the jury. Jones, 689 F.3d at 18. Once subjected to the harsh light of cross-

examination, the jury can best determine the weight Roy’s identification should be

accorded.

8
        Roy testified that he and Dennis picked up a 12-pack and a 40-ounce after they finished work
and spent the evening drinking. Although Roy estimated the time of the altercation to be around
11:00 p.m., Dennis and Coleman both testified that the time was around 4:00 a.m..

                                                20
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 74 Filed 02/05/13 Page 21 of 21           PageID #: 235



                    d. Nancy Cote

      As Cote herself was quick to point out, she did not see anything on the night

of August 19, 2011. She was shown the photo array solely to confirm that the

individual the Government had identified as the Defendant was the man Cote knew

as “Jamal.” The Government has represented that her “identification” is not going

to be used at trial, and, consequently, the Court need not address its reliability.

                                   CONCLUSION

      For the reasons stated, the Defendant’s motion to suppress the firearm

recovered by the police is DENIED. Defendant’s motion to suppress the witness

identification of Ronald Coleman is GRANTED, but his motion to suppress the

witness identification of Adam Dennis and Alan Roy are DENIED.



SO ORDERED.

                                               /s/ Nancy Torresen
                                               United States District Judge



Dated this 5th day of February, 2013.




                                          21
