Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 1 of 7                                  PageID #: 457



                                                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                                               DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                                            )
                                                                     )
                                                                     )
                                                                     )
v.                                                                   )    CRIMINAL NO. 2:12-CR-68-DBH-05
                                                                     )
CLIFFORD WELCH,                                                      )
                                                                     )
                                            DEFENDANT                )


           DECISION AND ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS


              On January 4, 2013, I held an evidentiary hearing on the defendant’s

motion to suppress.1                                    At the very close of argument, the defendant’s lawyer

asserted for the first time that the defendant’s search could not qualify as a

valid search incident to arrest, because the defendant Welch was never actually

arrested.2 I orally denied the defendant’s motion to suppress. Not content with

the parties’ argument on this late-raised issue, however, I directed counsel to

consult 3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure: A Treatise on the Fourth

Amendment § 5.4(b) (5th ed. 2012), and the cases cited therein. I granted a

week to file any additional briefing on this issue. Both the government and the

defendant provided written submissions accordingly.                                      After reviewing the

parties’ briefing and relevant caselaw, I adhere to my original conclusion that
                                                            
1 It was a joint hearing with co-defendant Paul Arnott.
2 This argument contradicted the defendant’s previous assertion that he was arrested and
interrogated in violation of his Miranda rights, see, e.g., Aff. of Clifford Welch in Supp. of Mot.
to Suppress ¶ 10 (ECF No. 191-1) (“I was placed under arrest and told by the Officer that drugs
were recovered on my person.”). Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 2 of 7      PageID #: 458



the defendant Welch was subjected to a lawful de facto arrest and that his

search consequently does not violate the Fourth Amendment. The defendant

Welch’s motion to suppress therefore continues to be DENIED.

                             FACTUAL BACKGROUND

      Around 12:38 PM on December 8, 2011, Scarborough police officer Brian

Nappi pulled over the defendant Clifford Welch in what was ostensibly a

routine traffic stop based upon a defective brake light in Welch’s vehicle.

Officer Nappi told Welch and testified in court that he observed Welch reaching

toward the center console of the car as he pulled over, that he grew concerned

that Welch was trying to conceal something in the vehicle, and that he ordered

him out of the car to conduct a patdown for concealed weapons.

      In fact, this was no mere traffic stop. Over the preceding weeks, DEA

agents and Scarborough police officers had been intercepting calls made to and

from the cellular phone number of James Brichetto, a Scarborough resident

suspected of conducting illicit drug transactions.        The agents overheard

numerous conversations related to Brichetto’s drug business, and on

November 30, 2011, intercepted the first of several such calls from a phone

number traced to the defendant.       In a series of calls on December 1, the

defendant Welch and Brichetto discussed prices and quantities.          Brichetto

subsequently called Welch to tell him “they’re right in the center console thing

. . . they’re right in a baggy” and instructed him, “just leave the money in there

. . . just lock my car.” There was no law enforcement intervention in the drug

transaction on December 1. On the morning of December 8, the date of the
                                                                                 2
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 3 of 7       PageID #: 459



ostensible traffic stop of Welch, Welch called Brichetto again. Brichetto asked

him, “What do you need?”, to which Welch replied, “seventy-five.” Brichetto

and Welch then agreed to meet around noon “at the track.” Agents overheard

another call at 12:05 PM in which Brichetto told Welch he was near Wal-Mart

and would be there in a minute.

      Around    12:21    PM,   DEA     agents   conducting   surveillance   at   the

Scarborough Downs racetrack observed Brichetto’s silver pickup truck pull

into the parking lot and park next to a green pickup truck. The silver pickup’s

driver, whom agents identified as James Brichetto, got out and entered the

passenger seat of the green pickup.         Brichetto remained there for several

minutes before returning to his own vehicle and departing. Neither the green

pickup occupant nor the silver pickup occupant went into Scarborough Downs.

Agents observed the green pickup depart in the same direction as Brichetto not

long afterward. The agents stationed in the parking lot reported the events to

other law enforcement on surveillance nearby, including Scarborough police

officer Joshua Guay, who observed the green pickup turn onto Route One.

Guay in turn relayed all of this information to Officer Nappi, also stationed

nearby on Route One.        Guay had already informed Nappi of the ongoing

wiretap investigation and the expected transaction between Welch and

Brichetto at Scarborough Downs, and had instructed Nappi to find a reason to

conduct a traffic stop of the vehicle if possible.




                                                                                   3
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 4 of 7           PageID #: 460



              The traffic stop and ensuing Terry3 patdown on the side of the road were

thus, in short, a pretext. Officer Nappi had been instructed to find a basis on

which to search Welch’s person without giving away the ongoing wiretap

investigation and the true reason for the search. Agents did not want members

of the drug distribution conspiracy to know they were being watched or

listened to, and wanted any discovery of drugs to appear to be a coincidental

byproduct of a routine traffic stop.

              During the patdown search, Nappi felt a bulge in Welch’s pants pocket

and asked if Welch could empty his pockets. Welch consented and eventually

produced a small plastic bag containing pills. Initially Welch claimed that they

were prescription-obtained methadone. After Nappi asked Welch why he had

so many pills and told Welch that he would call poison control to identify the

pills, Welch admitted that the pills were in fact oxycodone rather than

methadone, and that he had purchased the pills from a friend. After explaining

the potentially severe charges for possessing oxycodone, Nappi asked Welch if

he was willing to cooperate and provide more information. Welch agreed to go

to the police station in Nappi’s cruiser for further questioning.          Nappi told

Welch that he would have to undergo a more thorough search of his person

before being placed in the back of the cruiser and Welch consented.             Nappi

then searched Welch and placed him in the back of the cruiser without

handcuffs. Welch’s own car was towed. Upon arriving at the station, Welch


                                                            
3   Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968).

                                                                                     4
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 5 of 7         PageID #: 461



was brought to the interview room and informed of his Miranda rights before

speaking with Officers Nappi and Guay.         Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436

(1966) Welch was subsequently photographed and fingerprinted, but he was

released from the station without any formal charges. Over four months later,

on April 25, 2012, Welch was indicted for possession of oxycodone with intent

to distribute, conspiring to distribute and possess oxycodone with intent to

distribute, and aiding and abetting the conspiracy.

                                    DISCUSSION

      In its response to Welch’s motion to suppress, the government argued

that the challenged patdown that produced the drugs was valid both as a Terry

stop-and-frisk and as a search incident to a lawful arrest.              Given the

essentially pretextual nature of the Terry stop, I have focused on the latter

argument. I have already ruled from the bench that Officer Nappi had probable

cause to arrest Welch at the time of the stop because of what the officers and

agents collectively heard and observed about Welch-Brichetto drug dealing and

the Scarborough racetrack encounter. See United States v. Barnes, 506 F.3d

58, 62 (1st Cir. 2007) (holding that for purposes of determining probable cause,

“‘the focus is upon the collective knowledge possessed by, and the aggregate

information available to, all the officers involved in the investigation’” (citations

omitted)).   I also ruled that the arrest did not need to precede the search,

relying upon United States v. Bizier, 111 F.3d 214, 217 (1st Cir. 1997)

(“[W]hether a formal arrest occurred prior to or followed ‘quickly on the heels’ of

the challenged search does not affect the validity of the search so long as the
                                                                                   5
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 6 of 7                                         PageID #: 462



probable cause existed prior to the search.” (citing Rawlings v. Kentucky, 448

U.S. 98, 111 (1980))). The sole remaining issue, then, is not whether Welch

was searched incident to a lawful arrest but rather whether he was arrested at

all. I also ruled from the bench that Welch was not in custody for Miranda

purposes during the “patdown” at the time of the ostensible traffic stop.

              Under First Circuit precedent, “a de facto arrest occurs when ‘“a

reasonable man in the suspect’s position would have understood his situation,”

in the circumstances then obtaining, to be tantamount to being under arrest.’”

United States v. Jones, 700 F.3d 615, 624 (1st Cir. 2012) (citing United States

v. Zapata, 18 F.3d 971, 975 (1st Cir. 1994)).                                         Officer Nappi never told the

defendant Welch that he was being placed under arrest at the roadside, but the

circumstances are sufficient to establish under Jones that the defendant Welch

was under de facto arrest when he was placed in Officer Nappi’s police cruiser.

Although Welch was not handcuffed, he was not permitted to drive his own car

to the police station (it was towed). Instead, Welch was searched thoroughly

(beyond the earlier “patdown”) and then transported to the police station in

Officer Nappi’s cruiser.                                       There he was advised of his Miranda rights,

interviewed,                     photographed,                  and   fingerprinted    before   he   was   released.4

Although the de facto arrest did not occur until the defendant Welch entered
                                                            
4 Moreover, the defendant avoided formal arrest only by expressing his willingness to cooperate
with the police following the challenged search. Suppressing the fruits of the search would
have the perverse effect of penalizing the government for seeking a suspect’s cooperation rather
than immediately subjecting him to formal arrest and thereby imposing a greater intrusion on
his freedom. Cf. Commonwealth v. Washington, 869 N.E.2d 605, 614 (Mass. 2007) (“Thus,
where the police have legitimate reason not to arrest an individual, it is illogical to require them
to inflict this greater deprivation of liberty ‘to justify the lesser intrusion of a search.’” (citing
Commonwealth v. Skea, 470 N.E.2d 385, 393 (Mass. App. 1984))).

                                                                                                                    6
Case 2:12-cr-00068-DBH Document 251 Filed 01/15/13 Page 7 of 7                       PageID #: 463



the police cruiser upon the thorough search—a time later than the challenged

“patdown” search—the challenged search was nevertheless valid because the

de facto arrest followed shortly thereafter.5                     See Rawlings, 448 U.S. at 111

(holding that an arrest need not precede a search, so long as the search is

quickly followed by an arrest); Bizier, 111 F.3d at 217 (same).

              Because the search that produced the drugs was incident to a lawful

arrest, the search did not violate the Fourth Amendment. I therefore continue

to DENY the defendant Welch’s motion to suppress.

              SO ORDERED.

              DATED THIS 15TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2013

                                                               /S/D. BROCK HORNBY
                                                               D. BROCK HORNBY
                                                               UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




                                                            
5 As I noted at the hearing, the record does not reveal actual time lapses. It is apparent from
the testimony, however, that the events transpired quickly and without interruption or delay.

                                                                                                7
