Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 1 of 13       PageID #: 127



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                          DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
v.                                     ) No. 2:12-cr-00074
                                       )
MARK BELISLE                           )


            ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS


      The Defendant, Mark Belisle, has been charged with one count of possessing

a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime and one count of possessing

marijuana with the intent to distribute, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) and 21

U.S.C. § 841(a)(1). Before the Court is the Defendant’s Omnibus Motion to Suppress

Evidence (ECF No. 27). The Defendant moves to suppress evidence found as a result

of a search warrant authorizing the installation and use of an electronic tracking

device on the Defendant’s car and evidence found as a result of a search warrant

authorizing the search of the Defendant’s home. The Court has considered the

testimony, evidence, and counsels’ arguments presented at the hearing on February

6, 2013. The Court DENIES the Defendant’s motion.

                                     FACTS

 I.   The Warrant for a GPS Tracker

      On September 7, 2011, Maine Drug Enforcement Agency (MDEA) Special

Agent (SA) Tony Milligan obtained a warrant from Maine District Court

authorizing the nighttime installation and use of an electronic tracking device for




                                        1
    Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 2 of 13                 PageID #: 128



45 days on the Defendant’s 1999 GMC Suburban. SA Milligan’s affidavit contained

the following facts. Def.’s Ex. 1 (ECF No. 27-1).

         In January of 2010, a Lisbon police detective and MDEA SA Chad Carleton

interviewed a confidential informant (CI)1 who provided them with information

about Terry Johnson, who the CI described as a large-scale marijuana dealer living

in Litchfield, Maine who regularly receives about 50 pounds of marijuana, which he

redistributes in smaller quantities. The CI described Johnson’s property and

residence, and SA Carleton located Johnson’s Litchfield residence based on the CI’s

description.

         In June of 2010, the CI reported to SA Carleton that he had been with

Johnson at Johnson’s house two days before, and Johnson had told the CI that he

pays $33,000 for a bale of marijuana. The CI saw large trash bags at Johnson’s

house that contained marijuana remnants and smelled strongly of marijuana.

         In August of 2010, the CI told SA Carleton that he had been at Johnson’s

house that day, and Johnson had said that he was expecting a marijuana resupply

soon. The CI also told SA Carleton that he had seen a man named Bill pick up a




1
        The affidavit states that SA Carleton “has determined that CI is a credible and reliable
source of information.” Def.’s Ex. 1 ¶ 6. In 2010, the CI had provided information about a Portland
residence where marijuana was being cultivated and stored. The CI’s information was corroborated
by the MDEA, a search warrant was executed at the house, and marijuana was seized from the
residence, culminating in a successful prosecution. At the time of this interview, the CI was not
facing any criminal charges, and no promises of gain or payment were made to the CI then or
subsequently. The Government was unable to explain at oral argument why the individual was
dubbed a “confidential informant” rather than a “concerned citizen.” See United States v. Croto, 570
F.3d 11, 14 (1st Cir. 2009) (individuals willingly providing information and receiving nothing in
return “were concerned citizens reporting potential criminal activity, whose stories may be more
easily accepted than those of confidential informants whose motivations make their stories more
suspect”).


                                                 2
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 3 of 13       PageID #: 129



duffel bag or two of marijuana from Johnson. The CI told SA Carleton that Bill

associates with a man named Mark from Lewiston who drives a blue Suburban.

      About a year later, in August of 2011, the CI and SA Carleton spoke on the

phone several times. The CI told SA Carleton that Mark, who drove an older

blue/green Suburban, was assisting Johnson with a large-scale outdoor marijuana

growing operation. He said that the men travel in Mark’s Suburban to Johnson’s

marijuana grow sites to tend the plants. The CI described Mark’s residence and its

location, and a detective located the Defendant’s house based on the CI’s

description. It had a blue Suburban parked in the driveway that the detective

confirmed was registered to the Defendant.

      On the morning of August 25, 2011, the CI told SA Carleton that Johnson

and the Defendant had left that morning in the Defendant’s Suburban to cultivate

their marijuana plants because of a predicted hurricane. A detective corroborated

that the Defendant’s Suburban was not parked at his residence.

      The CI also told SA Carleton that Johnson had a small, white towable

camper down a hill behind his house where Johnson and the Defendant processed,

packaged, and stored their harvested marijuana before Johnson sold it. The CI told

SA Carleton that Johnson uses a dehumidifier in the camper to dry out the

marijuana and packages it in five gallon buckets. The CI also said that Johnson had

recently bragged about making $100,000 in sales from the marijuana he cultivated

that year, and said that he shipped the bulk of his marijuana to New York. SA

Carleton looked at some aerial photos of Johnson’s property taken the previous fall




                                        3
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 4 of 13         PageID #: 130



and observed a small white camper sitting behind Johnson’s house, which did not

appear to have been moved in some time.

      Paragraph 12 of Milligan’s affidavit states that in the afternoon on August

25, 2011, SA Carleton and other agents conducted surveillance from a wooded area

on Johnson’s property where SA Carleton could observe the back of Johnson’s house

and the camper. SA Carleton saw a blue Suburban arrive and park behind a single-

wide mobile office sitting next to the house and two middle-aged males get out of

the Suburban. One male walked into Johnson’s house. The other opened the

Suburban’s rear door, took out a black trash bag that was approximately one-third

full, carried it to the mobile office, and set the bag inside the office before going

inside Johnson’s house. A short time later, the same man came out of the house and

departed in the Suburban. Another agent confirmed that the Suburban was

registered to the Defendant.

II.   The Search Warrant for Defendant’s Residence

      On October 18, 2011, SA Carleton sought and obtained a warrant from Maine

District Court to search the Defendant’s residence. Def.’s Ex. 3 (ECF No. 27-3). SA

Carleton’s affidavit for his warrant application relied on details about Johnson and

the Defendant’s marijuana growing operation obtained through the electronic

tracking device on the Defendant’s Suburban and independent police investigation,

including two additional occasions during which SA Carleton conducted surveillance

from the woods on Johnson’s property. In the search of the Defendant’s home,




                                          4
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 5 of 13                 PageID #: 131



officers found distributable quantities of marijuana and a semi-automatic assault

weapon.

III.     The Hearing on the Motion to Suppress

         SA Milligan, SA Carleton and the Defendant testified at the hearing on the

motion to suppress.

       A. SA Carleton’s Testimony about Johnson’s Property

         The Johnson property constitutes many acres,2 which are roughly bounded by

Route 197 to the south and a stream that defines the east and northern side of the

property. The property can generally be described as a ranch house facing Route

197, which has a small mown lawn area and a few outbuildings. The area of the

residence and outbuildings is surrounded by pasture. The pasture is surrounded by

woods on the northern and eastern sides of the property and the woods are abutted

by two boggy areas and the stream that defines the border of the property. Johnson

owns cows which graze on the pasture and traverse the woods to drink from the

bogs.

         The house is accessed from Route 197 by a driveway which is exposed to the

road. Next to the house is a mobile office. Behind the house is a chain link fence

that encloses an area which is about the width of the house and extends back from

the house approximately forty feet. A small white camper sits in the pasture area

about fifteen yards from the back of the house.




2      Although SA Carleton did not have precise figures he estimated that the Johnson property
was about 70 acres. The Defendant testified that the property was about 80 acres.


                                              5
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 6 of 13                      PageID #: 132



       On August 25, 2011, SA Carleton entered the southeast corner of Johnson’s

property where Route 197, the woods, and the bog converge. He hopped an electric

fence3 and entered the woods. From there, SA Carleton walked in a northwesterly

direction through the woods roughly parallel to the bog’s edge and the river. When

SA Carleton thought he was about even with the back of Johnson’s house, he turned

west and walked through the woods up a slight grade toward the house. He stopped

approximately 100 feet from the tree line where, through the trees, he could see the

white camper and the house beyond it. SA Carleton estimated that he was

approximately 130 yards away from the house and approximately 115 yards away

from the camper where he stopped. It was from this vantage point that SA Carleton

observed the activity that comprises paragraph 12 of Milligan’s affidavit.

       SA Carleton testified that there were no signs advising people to keep out

and the property was not posted against hunting. SA Carleton stated that he

observed no paths or signs of human activity within the woods with the exception of

an abandoned shed and some old feed buckets.

    B. The Defendant’s Testimony about Johnson’s Property

       The Defendant testified that the electric fence runs around the entire

perimeter of Johnson’s property and is active.4 The Defendant testified that the

fence is designed to keep livestock in and people out. The Defendant described



3        SA Carleton described the fence as old posts with wires running from post to post. SA
Carleton did not touch the wires and could not testify as to whether the fence was electrified. He
testified that the fence was designed to contain livestock. Defendant’s Exhibit 1 shows a portion of
the fence.
4        Contrary to SA Carleton’s testimony, the Defendant testified that the electric fence runs on
the outside of the two bog areas and thus allows the cows to have access to water from the bogs.


                                                 6
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 7 of 13                     PageID #: 133



several paths within the woods that the livestock follow to reach the watering areas.

The Defendant stated that Johnson’s children at one time used the shed as their

play house, but he did not say how recently that activity took place.5 The Defendant

also described a few paths that led to additional clearings in the woods, which are

visible on the aerial photograph provided as Government Exhibit 4. The Defendant

did not state who used these paths or why or how frequently they are used.

                                        DISCUSSION

    The Defendant’s arguments begin with the premise that the information

contained in paragraph 12 of Milligan’s affidavit must be excised from the affidavit

because it was obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment.6 Specifically, the

Defendant asserts that because SA Carleton was within a constitutionally protected

area — the curtilage of the camper where the marijuana was processed — his

observations, which form the basis of paragraph 12, must be stricken. Once

paragraph 12 is excised from the affidavit, the defense argues, the warrant which

allowed the police to place a GPS tracker on the Defendant’s vehicle fails for lack of

probable cause. The Defendant further argues that the tainted information gleaned

from the GPS tracker and additional unconstitutional incursions by SA Carleton

5        The Defendant testified that he had been helping Johnson on the farm since the mid to late
1990’s when Johnson’s children got old enough and decided that they did not want to help around
the farm anymore. This would suggest that the play house, which was described by SA Carleton as a
pile of rubble, has not been used in recent years.
6        The Fourth Amendment provides:

       The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,
       against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants
       shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and
       particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be
       seized.

U.S. Const. amend. IV.


                                                7
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 8 of 13                     PageID #: 134



onto the Johnson property must be struck from Carleton’s affidavit. Without the

stricken material, the Defendant concludes, Carleton’s affidavit did not contain

probable cause to support a search of the Defendant’s residence.

         The Government counters that, as a threshold matter, the Defendant has

failed to establish that he has standing to challenge the entry onto Johnson’s

property.7 But even if the Court finds standing, the Government contends that SA

Carleton was never within the curtilage of either Johnson’s house or the camper

behind it. Finally, the Government contends that Milligan’s affidavit contains

probable cause even if paragraph 12 is excised.

    I.   The Curtilage Question

         The Supreme Court has held that in addition to a person’s house, the Fourth

Amendment also protects the “curtilage” of a house, the area surrounding the house

that is so “intimately tied to the home itself that it should be placed under the

home’s ‘umbrella’ of Fourth Amendment protection.” United States v. Dunn, 480

U.S. 294, 301 (1987). The Fourth Amendment does not protect open fields, the

property outside the curtilage of a home. Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170, 178

(1984). The Court considers four factors in determining whether the area around a

house should be considered the curtilage:


7       Defendant asserts a privacy interest in the camper and the camper’s curtilage, which he
claims extends to where the agents stood, because the camper was “used by Johnson and Belisle to
harvest and process marijuana for sale.” Def.’s Reply to Gov’t’s Obj. to Def.’s Omnibus Mot. to
Suppress 5 (ECF No. 40). The Government contends that the Defendant lacks standing to challenge
the search of a camper owned by Johnson on Johnson’s land. The Court notes that both Milligan and
Carleton’s affidavits contain evidence that the Defendant used the camper with Johnson as a
processing facility for the marijuana that they were harvesting. Because the Court concludes, infra,
that the search was valid, it will assume without deciding that the Defendant had a reasonable
expectation of privacy in the camper.


                                                 8
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 9 of 13                      PageID #: 135



       the proximity of the area claimed to be curtilage to the home, whether
       the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home, the
       nature of the uses to which the area is put, and the steps taken by the
       resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by.

Dunn, 480 U.S. at 301.8

       The Defendant cannot and does not assert that he had a reasonable

expectation of privacy in Johnson’s house and curtilage. His argument is that he

had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the camper and its curtilage, which he

claims extends to the electric fence surrounding the Johnson property. His

argument, essentially, is that the camper was his place of business.

       SA Carleton credibly testified that he was positioned 100 feet into the woods

approximately 115 yards away from the camper. Assuming, without deciding, that

the Defendant did have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the camper as his

place of business, and presuming that the camper actually had its own curtilage,

the evidence does not support the Defendant’s claim that the camper’s curtilage



8       In Dunn, law enforcement officials made a warrantless entry onto the defendant’s ranch,
which comprised approximately 198 acres completely encircled by a perimeter fence and containing
several interior fences constructed mainly of posts and multiple strands of barbed wire. The agents
crossed over the perimeter fence and one interior fence and proceeded to a barn that was
approximately sixty yards away from a house that was encircled by another fence. To reach the barn,
the officers crossed yet another interior fence as well as a wooden fence that enclosed the front
portion of the barn. The officers walked under the barn’s overhang to the barn’s locked wooden half-
gates and looked inside the barn. From that position, they observed a phenylacetone laboratory. Id.
at 297-98.
        The majority in Dunn held that the barn was outside the curtilage of the home where: 1) the
barn was not sufficiently close to the house to be treated as an adjunct of the house; 2) the clearly
marked curtilage was the house and the fence immediately around the house and did not extend to
the barn; 3) the officers had information that the barn was not being used for intimate activities of
the home; and 4) the defendant had done “little to protect the barn area from observation by those
standing in the open fields.” Id. at 301-303.
        In Dunn, the respondent made an alternate argument that he possessed an expectation of
privacy, independent of his home and its curtilage, in the barn and its contents because the barn was
an essential part of his business. The Supreme Court rejected the argument, concluding that the
unoccupied barn was part of the open fields. Id. at 304.


                                                 9
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 10 of 13                        PageID #: 136



extended past the open pasture areas and into the woods.9 Defendant’s argument

that the camper’s curtilage extended to the perimeter fence on Johnson’s property

would mean that the little camper enjoyed a curtilage of approximately 70-80 acres.

That theory stretches the curtilage concept beyond recognition.

       The Defendant makes much of his argument that the livestock fences were to

keep animals in and people out. But the same type of fence was at issue in Dunn,

where the Court stated: “Nothing in the record suggests that the various interior

fences on respondent’s property had any function other than that of the typical

ranch fence; the fences were designed and constructed to corral livestock, not to

prevent persons from observing what lay inside the enclosed areas.” Dunn, 480 U.S.

at 303. Notwithstanding the Defendant’s self-serving testimony that the fences

were designed to keep people out, neither a barbed wire nor an electric fence

provides protection from prying eyes or from anyone dexterous enough to duck

through the openings between the wires.

       The Defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights were not violated by the

surveillance from the woods behind Johnson’s pastures, and SA Carleton’s

observations during that surveillance were properly included in SA Milligan’s

affidavit.




9        In United States v. Diehl, 276 F.3d 32 (1st Cir. 2002), the First Circuit held that an entire
half-acre clearing on a remote property in Maine constituted the curtilage to a crude camp and its
adjacent marijuana processing building. The Court noted, however, that the entire clearing was used
by the camp occupants for intimate activities of living, including nude sunbathing, conjugal
activities, and urination. Id. at 37, 40-41. There was no testimony in this case that the pasture or
wooded areas were used for any activities of living or any activities association with business related
to the camper.


                                                  10
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 11 of 13            PageID #: 137



II.   Probable Cause in the Milligan Affidavit

      The government’s installation of an electronic tracking device on a person’s

vehicle and use of that device to track that person’s movements is a search for

purposes of the Fourth Amendment. United States v. Jones, 132 S. Ct. 945, 949

(2012).

      When issuing a warrant,

      [t]he task of the issuing magistrate is simply to make a practical,
      common-sense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth
      in the affidavit before him, including the “veracity” and “basis of
      knowledge” of persons supplying hearsay information, there is a fair
      probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a
      particular place. And the duty of the reviewing court is simply to
      ensure that the magistrate had a “substantial basis for . . .
      conclud[ing]” that probable cause existed.

Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238-39 (1983) (quoting Jones v. United States, 362

U.S. 257, 271 (1960)). “A warrant application must demonstrate probable cause to

believe that (1) a crime has been committed – the ‘commission’ element, and (2)

enumerated evidence of the offense will be found at the place to be searched – the

so-called ‘nexus’ element.” United States v. Feliz, 182 F.3d 82, 86 (1st Cir. 1999).

      SA Milligan’s affidavit establishes that the CI was known to SA Carleton and

had provided information on another marijuana growing operation a year earlier

that had led to a successful search, seizure of marijuana, and conviction. The

affidavit states that SA Carleton believes the CI to be credible and reliable. The

affidavit also establishes that the CI was not facing any criminal charges and was

not paid or promised payment or gain for his information. The CI offered first-hand

knowledge about Johnson’s activities. See United States v. Greenberg, 410 F.3d 63,



                                           11
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 12 of 13        PageID #: 138



67 (1st Cir. 2005) (frequent face-to-face contact between agent and informant,

information that informant has been reliable in the past, and first-hand knowledge

possessed by an informant all support the informant’s credibility).

        The officers corroborated details of the CI’s information. Officers located

Johnson’s residence and the Defendant’s residence and vehicle based on the CI’s

descriptions. SA Carleton corroborated the existence of the camper behind

Johnson’s property from a photograph taken the year before that suggested that the

camper was not frequently moved. The officers corroborated that the Defendant’s

Suburban was not parked at his house the morning the CI said that the Defendant

and Johnson were visiting their grow sites in the Defendant’s Suburban. SA

Carleton further corroborated the CI when he went to Johnson’s property and

observed two men arriving at Johnson’s house in the Defendant’s Suburban. One

man brought a garbage bag about one-third full from the Suburban to a mobile

office parked on Johnson’s property. Both men entered the house and one man left

shortly thereafter in the Defendant’s Suburban. Finally, the affidavit establishes a

nexus between the suspected marijuana growing operation and the Defendant’s

Suburban, which the officers suspected was what the Defendant and Johnson used

to visit their grow sites and transport marijuana from the grow sites to Johnson’s

home.

        The Court concludes that the affidavit contained sufficient information to

allow the issuing judge to find the CI credible and to have a substantial basis to

conclude that there was a fair probability that installing an electronic tracking




                                         12
Case 2:12-cr-00074-NT Document 46 Filed 02/11/13 Page 13 of 13        PageID #: 139



device on the Defendant’s Suburban would uncover evidence of the Defendant and

Johnson’s marijuana growing operation.

       The Court finds that the affidavit authorizing the installation of the

electronic tracking device on the Defendant’s car was issued on probable cause, and

the Defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights were not violated.

III.   Probable Cause in the Carleton Affidavit

       Defense counsel conceded at oral argument that Carleton’s affidavit, if

considered as a whole, contained probable cause to support the search of the

Defendant’s house. Because the Court has concluded that SA Carleton’s presence on

Johnson’s property did not violate the Fourth Amendment, and the warrant

authorizing the electronic tracking device was issued on probable cause, Carleton’s

affidavit should be considered in its entirety, and the issuing judge had a

substantial basis for concluding that probable cause existed to search the

Defendant’s home.

                                 CONCLUSION

       The Court concludes that there was no violation of the Defendant’s

constitutional rights. The Defendant’s motion to suppress is DENIED.

SO ORDERED.


                                              /s/ Nancy Torresen
                                              United States District Judge


Dated this 11th day of February, 2013.




                                         13
