Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 1 of 10          PageID #: 609



                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                )
                                         )
                                         ) Criminal No. 2:12-cr-00065-NT-1
v.                                       )
                                         )
                                         )
BRUNEL CONSTANT.                         )


       SECOND ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS


      The Defendant, Brunel Constant, is charged with possession of a firearm by a

convicted felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). He is scheduled for a jury trial

before this Court on May 20-21, 2013. On May 13, 2013, the Court re-opened the

hearing on the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Identification Evidence (ECF No.

29) to determine whether witness Adam Dennis’s in-court identification of the

Defendant should be suppressed. See Report of Conference (ECF No. 99). After

considering the testimony and evidence presented at this hearing, and counsels’

arguments, the Court will allow Dennis to make an in-court identification.

                                    Background

      The Court describes here the factual and procedural background relevant to

its decision. The facts surrounding the charged offense and witness Adam Dennis’s

involvement as an eyewitness are set forth in greater detail in the Court’s factual

findings in its Opinion and Order on Motions to Suppress (ECF No. 74).




                                          1
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 2 of 10                     PageID #: 610



    1. Defendant’s Motion to Suppress

       In August of 2012, the Defendant filed two motions to suppress evidence, a

Motion to Suppress Identification Evidence (ECF No. 29) and a Second Motion to

Suppress Evidence (ECF No. 30). Defendant’s first motion sought to suppress the

testimony of four witnesses about their identification of the Defendant in a photo

array, as well as any in-court identifications by these witnesses of the Defendant.

The second motion sought to suppress the firearm the Defendant is charged with

possessing, which was seized from a porch eave during a warrantless search. The

Court held evidentiary hearings on the motions on November 26, 2012 and January

25, 2013.

       In its Opinion and Order on Motions to Suppress, the Court determined that

the six-photo array that was shown by Lewiston Police Department Officer Derrick

St. Laurent to the four witnesses was impermissibly suggestive because, while all

the photos in the array were of black men, the Defendant was the only man in the

array with long dreadlocks wearing a white tank top, the two salient details in the

description given to the police. Id. at 6; see id. at 3. But the Court ultimately

concluded that the identifications of two out of the four witnesses, Alan Roy and

Adam Dennis, were nonetheless reliable. Id. at 18-20. Dennis had been in a face-to-

face altercation with the suspect for five to ten minutes and was shown the photo

array the same day as that altercation. Id. at 19.1 The Court credited Dennis’s

testimony that he had no difficulty identifying the Defendant in the photo array and


1       Roy, a closer call, recognized the suspect from around Lewiston and had seen him several
times that night, including once when the suspect passed right by him in a lit hallway. Id.at 19-20.


                                                 2
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 3 of 10       PageID #: 611



concluded that Officer St. Laurent had confused Dennis with Roy when he testified

that Dennis had initially hesitated between two photos in the array before choosing

the Defendant. Id. at 7, 7 n.3. The Court thus concluded that Dennis and Roy’s

identifications of the Defendant from the photo array were reliable enough to go to

the jury. Id. at 21.

   2. Defendant’s Motion In Limine

       On May 8, 2013, the Defendant filed a motion in limine asserting that on

May 7, 2013, the Government produced a disk that contained a never-before-seen

video recording of Officer St. Laurent’s August 19, 2011 interview with Dennis and

Dennis’s identification of the Defendant in the photo array. First Motion in Limine

(ECF No. 94). The Defendant included a copy of the video recording as an exhibit to

the motion. First Motion In Limine Ex. A (ECF No. 94-1).

       The Court held a conference of counsel on May 10, 2013. The Government

explained that the disk had come from the Lewiston Police Department labeled

“Dennis interview.” The Government did not attempt to listen to the recording and

assumed that it was Jencks material that the Government was obligated to produce

only shortly before trial. See 18 U.S.C. § 3500(a). The Government denied knowing

that the disk contained a video recording of the photo array. The disk included

statements of Officer St. Laurent and Dennis, both of whom testified at the

November 26, 2012 suppression hearing. As such, the Government was required

under Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 26.2 & 12(h) to produce the disk no later




                                        3
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 4 of 10                   PageID #: 612



than after Officer St. Laurent and Dennis testified.2 The disk also contained

material which was exculpatory to the Defendant and which would have been useful

to impeach both Officer St. Laurent and Dennis.

       As a result of the newly discovered evidence, the Court continued the trial

date by one week and re-opened the hearing on the Defendant’s Motion to Suppress

Identification Evidence to determine whether the newly discovered evidence altered

the Court’s determination of the admissibility of Dennis’s identification of the

Defendant. See Report of Conference (ECF No. 99).

    3. The Re-Opened Hearing on Defendant’s Motion to Suppress

       At the May 13, 2013 hearing, the government played the video of the photo

array. At the beginning of the video, Officer St. Laurent tells Dennis: “so looks like

we got the guy that did it.” After a brief interview about the events of the previous

evening, Officer St. Laurent asks Dennis if he thinks that he could pick the man

that he saw out of a photo line-up, and Dennis responds, “Sure, I guess so.” Officer

St. Laurent tells Dennis that the suspect may not be in the photo array. Officer St.

Laurent has two manila folders in his lap, and he pulls the photograph of the

Defendant out of one of the folders. As Officer St. Laurent moves the Defendant’s

photo to the second folder, it is clearly visible to Dennis, who is looking directly at it.

Officer St. Laurent puts the Defendant’s photo into the second folder, and then he


2       The Government acknowledged that it received the disk from Officer St. Laurent in a timely
fashion and took full responsibility for the delayed disclosure. Government counsel apologized
profusely for its failure to comply with its discovery obligations, and the Court finds that the
Government’s failure to produce the video recording was inadvertent. Because the suppression
hearing was re-opened and the Defendant was given an additional week to prepare for trial, the
Defendant has not been prejudiced by the untimely disclosure. The Court thus believes that the
sanction of excluding Dennis’s testimony in its entirety is not appropriate.


                                                4
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 5 of 10         PageID #: 613



pulls the six photos out of the second folder and places them one-by-one on the table

in front of Dennis. He puts the Defendant’s photo front and center before Dennis.

      “It’s a tough one,” Dennis immediately says, “I’m guessing it’s him, that

would be the one I’d be putting my money on,” pointing his forefinger at the

Defendant. “Either him, or him,” he adds, now pointing his pinky at another photo

of a lighter-skinned black man with short dreadlocks wearing an orange jumpsuit.

“Either, you know, it wasn’t any of these guys, I know that,” Dennis says, pointing

quickly at the remainder of the photos. “Yeah, I’m not sure,” he mumbles. Without

waiting a beat, Officer St. Laurent says, “So you think it’s this one right here,”

tapping at the Defendant’s photo. “Yeah,” Dennis says. “Alright,” says Officer St.

Laurent, reaching for a pen, “you just want to sign that for me?” “Sign it?” “Yeah

just sign it and put today’s date on it.” Dennis signs the photo of the Defendant. “So

that’s the guy we have in custody right now,” Officer St. Laurent tells Dennis.

      Officer — now Detective — St. Laurent and Adam Dennis testified at the

hearing. Detective St. Laurent acknowledged that the recording of the Dennis photo

array should be a “video on how not to do a photo lineup.”

      Dennis testified that he had an altercation with the man he identified at 4:00

a.m. the morning of August 19, 2011, that lasted five to ten minutes. He testified

that the whole exchange with the man he roused from the porch was memorable

because it grew heated, and the man promised to come back with a gun. He testified

he was in a well-lit hallway for part of the time that he was speaking with the

Defendant. Dennis testified that he had about two beers over the course of the night




                                          5
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 6 of 10                      PageID #: 614



he saw the man and that he was not impaired.3 He remained confident that he

could identify the person that he saw that night. He did not remember being

rushed, hesitating between two photos, or feeling as though Officer St. Laurent was

suggesting that he pick one photo in particular. Dennis did admit that he made

some racial slurs during the altercation with the man on the porch after the man

got belligerent.

                                           Discussion

    1. Relevant Law

       “[E]vidence is not normally suppressed because it is debatable or arguably

unreliable—much testimony at trial is of this character—and customarily cross-

examination is the means of testing the strength of such evidence.” United States v.

Jones, 689 F.3d 12, 17 (1st Cir. 2012). “Both as to pretrial identifications and in-

court identifications, our analysis takes two steps. We look first to see if there was

anything impermissibly suggestive about the identification procedure and, second,

if there was impermissible suggestiveness, ‘to decide whether the identification

itself was reliable under the totality of the circumstances.’” United States v.

Holliday, 457 F.3d 121, 125 (1st Cir. 2006). The totality of the circumstances

includes:

       the opportunity of the witness to view the criminal at the time of the
       crime, the witness’ degree of attention, the accuracy of his prior

3       Alan Roy previously testified that he and Dennis purchased a twelve-pack and a forty ounce
of beer after they completed work on August 18th. On cross-examination, Dennis conceded he might
have had more than two beers, but he maintained that he was not impaired. Even if Dennis had
consumed half of the beer purchased (a fact not in evidence), that amount of beer over the course of
ten hours for a person the size of Dennis would not necessarily have impaired his ability to perceive
the incident. In the video made approximately 12 hours later, Dennis appears fresh and shows no
residual signs of impairment.


                                                 6
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 7 of 10              PageID #: 615



       description of the criminal, the level of certainty demonstrated at the
       confrontation, and the time between the crime and the confrontation.
       Against these factors is to be weighed the corrupting effect of the
       suggestive identification itself.

Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98, 114 (1977). “The standard being applied is

meant to screen out only evidence that is clearly unreliable and not to supplant the

jury’s ordinary function of weighing what the witness says and choosing the weight

to accord it.” Jones, 689 F.3d at 18. “[I]dentification evidence – identifications made

before trial and in the courtroom – should be suppressed as a matter of due process

‘only in extraordinary cases.’” Holliday, 457 F.3d at 125 (quoting United States v.

Henderson, 320 F.3d 92, 100 (1st Cir. 2003)).

   2. The Reliability of Dennis’s Identification

       The Court has already ruled that the photo array shown to Dennis was

impermissibly     suggestive.    Viewing      the   video   strengthens   this   conclusion

exponentially. The reliability analysis is weighed against the “corrupting effect of

the suggestive identification.” Manson, 432 U.S. at 114. There can be no question

here that the photo array could have had a corrupting effect. The question is

whether the case falls within that narrow class of “extraordinary cases” which

require judges to supplant the jury’s role of weighing the identification for

themselves. This is a very close call. Ultimately, however, the Court concludes that

despite the extremely suggestive nature of the photo array, Dennis’s identification

is sufficiently reliable to go to the jury.

       Dennis’s testimony at the May 13, 2013 suppression hearing remained

consistent with his prior testimony. He testified that he saw the man on the porch



                                               7
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 8 of 10        PageID #: 616



for five to ten minutes and part of the encounter took place in a lit hallway. He

testified that his interaction with the man was memorable because it grew heated

and the man threatened to come back with a gun. Although Dennis had been

drinking that evening, there is no evidence that Dennis was impaired. The fact that

Dennis’s original description of a black man with long braids lacked detail may have

been the result of the rushed interview. Dennis made his identification

approximately twelve hours after the incident when his memory was fresh.

      As for the level of certainty demonstrated at the time of the confrontation,

the video shows that Dennis hedges in his language — “I’m guessing,” “I’m not sure”

— but he clearly points to the Defendant first before he widens the field to the

Defendant and one other. And because Detective St. Laurent rushed Dennis to sign

the photograph of the Defendant, there is no way of knowing whether Dennis would

have definitively ruled out the second photo had he been given time to consider.

      The video recording of Dennis’s identification of the Defendant is not

inconsistent with Dennis’s prior testimony about the array. During the November

26, 2012 hearing, Dennis testified that he “had no trouble” picking out the

Defendant because it was “fresh in his mind.” But he qualified his testimony: “Yeah,

I’m pretty positive. I don’t remember, it was over a year ago.”

      Q: You don’t remember. So you may have had trouble; is that –
      A: No, I don’t think I had trouble. I’m not sure.
      Q: And you don’t think you hesitated between a couple?
      A: If I would have hesitated, it would have been for a second
      maybe and I don’t believe I did, no.




                                          8
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 9 of 10         PageID #: 617



The video recording confirms that Dennis hesitated only for a second. Dennis’s

testimony at the May 13, 2013 hearing and the video recording do not materially

change the Court’s conclusion that despite the suggestive array, Dennis should be

allowed to make an in-court identification if he can.

      This is not to say the jury should not be given tools to assist them in

assessing Dennis’s in-court identification of the Defendant. Although the

Government has indicated it will not ask Dennis about his pre-trial identification,

the Defendant remains free to use that identification to demonstrate the

weaknesses inherent in Dennis’s in-court identification. Defense counsel will be

given ample opportunity to cross-examine Dennis on his interaction with the man

on the back porch and the suggestive circumstances of his pre-trial identification.

The Defendant may also be entitled to a jury instruction on the risks of cross-racial

identification, the risks of identifications made under stressful circumstances, the

weak correlation between a witness’s confidence and the accuracy of the

identification, and the influence of suggestive identification practices. See Jones,

689 F.3d at 19-20.




                                          9
Case 2:12-cr-00065-NT Document 103 Filed 05/15/13 Page 10 of 10         PageID #: 618



                                   Conclusion

      For the foregoing reasons, the Court concludes that the Government is not

precluded from asking Dennis if he can make an in-court identification of the

Defendant. The Defendant’s First Motion in Limine and Motion to Suppress

Identification Evidence as re-opened are DENIED.


      SO ORDERED.

      Dated this 15th day of May, 2013.



                                               /s/ Nancy Torresen
                                               United States District Judge




                                          10
