 Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 1 of 6                     PageID #: 95



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                      )
                                              )
v.                                            )              No. 2:13-cr-48-DBH
                                              )
ADAM WHITE,                                   )
                                              )
               Defendant                      )



               MEMORANDUM DECISION ON MOTION FOR DISCOVERY


       The defendant, charged with possession with intent to distribute of 500 grams or more of

a mixture or substance containing cocaine, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), and possession

of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1),

Indictment (ECF No. 1) at 1-2, asks the court to order the government to produce certain records

concerning the drug dog that was used to sniff his vehicle before his arrest, the dog’s handler,

and the handler’s previous drug dog. Defendant’s Motion for Discovery (“Motion”) (ECF No.

25) at 1-2. He asserts that he seeks this material for review by his “potential drug dog expert,”

who “will opine that the dog’s actions during the stop and sniff did not create a positive alert and

generally reflect inadequate training of the dog.” Id. at 2. I deny the motion.

                                            Discussion

       In its response, the government states that it has already produced the following:

certification documents for the handler; certification documents for the drug dog involved

(Aros); all training records on file related to Aros; and a complete copy of the manual used to

train and certify Aros.      Government’s Objection to Defendant’s Motion for Discovery

(“Objection”) (ECF No. 32) at 2.     It identifies the materials requested by the defendant that it

                                                  1
 Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 2 of 6                     PageID #: 96



has declined to produce as all certification documents for the handler’s previous drug dog (Caro)

and all records, reports, and videos generated in other criminal investigations in which Aros has

been involved. Id. at 3. The defendant does not disagree with this statement. Defendant’s Reply

to the Government’s Objection to His Motion for Discovery (”Reply”) (ECF No. 34) passim.

       The parties also agree that Florida v. Harris, __ U.S. __, 133 S.Ct. 1050 (2013),

establishes the legal standard for review of the defendant’s discovery demand in this case. In

Harris, the defendant refused consent to search his truck after a traffic stop, a trained narcotics

dog alerted at the driver’s side door handle, and a subsequent search of the truck yielded

ingredients for manufacturing methamphetamine, but nothing that the dog was trained to detect.

133 S.Ct. at 1053-54. The defendant moved to suppress this evidence on the ground that the

dog’s alert had not provided the officer with probable cause for a search. Id. at 1054.

       The state supreme court upheld the granting of the motion to suppress, creating a list of

information that the state must present when a drug dog’s alert is challenged, including

            the dog’s training and certification records, an explanation of the
            meaning of the particular training and certification, field performance
            records (including any unverified alerts), and evidence concerning the
            experience and training of the officer handling the dog, as well as any
            other objective evidence known to the officer about the dog’s reliability.

Id. at 1055.    The state court “particularly stressed the need for ‘evidence of the dog’s

performance history,’ including records showing ‘how often the dog has alerted in the field

without illegal contraband having been found.’” Id.

       The Supreme Court rejected the use of a mandatory checklist in such circumstances,

observing in addition that “[m]aking matters worse, the decision below treats records of a dog’s

field performance as the gold standard in evidence, when in most cases they have relatively




                                                 2
 Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 3 of 6                        PageID #: 97



limited import.” Id at 1056. “The better measure of a dog’s reliability thus comes away from the

field, in controlled testing environments.” Id.at 1057.

       The Court elaborated:

                For that reason, evidence of a dog’s satisfactory performance in a
            certification or training program can itself provide sufficient reason to
            trust his alert. If a bona fide organization has certified a dog after testing
            his reliability in a controlled setting, a court can presume (subject to any
            conflicting evidence offered) that the dog’s alert provides probable cause
            to search. The same is true, even in the absence of formal certification,
            if the dog has recently and successfully completed a training program
            that evaluated his proficiency in locating drugs. . . .

                A defendant, however, must have an opportunity to challenge such
            evidence of a dog’s reliability, whether by cross-examining the testifying
            officer or by introducing his own fact or expert witnesses. The
            defendant, for example, may contest the adequacy of a certification or
            training program, perhaps asserting that its standards are too lax or its
            methods faulty. So too, the defendant may examine how the dog (or
            handler) performed in the assessments made in those settings. Indeed,
            evidence of the dog’s (or handler’s) history in the field, although
            susceptible to the kind of misinterpretation we have discussed, may
            sometimes be relevant[.] . . . (“[T]he defendant can ask the handler, if the
            handler is on the stand, about field performance, and then the court can
            give that answer whatever weight is appropriate”). And even assuming a
            dog is generally reliable, circumstances surrounding a particular alert
            may undermine the case for probable cause – if, say, the officer cued the
            dog (consciously or not), or if the team was working under unfamiliar
            conditions.

               In short, a probable-cause hearing focusing on a dog’s alert should
            proceed much like any other. . . . The question—similar to every inquiry
            into probable cause—is whether all the facts surrounding a dog’s alert,
            viewed through the lens of common sense, would make a reasonably
            prudent person think that a search would reveal contraband or evidence
            of a crime. A sniff is up to snuff when it meets that test.

Id. at 1057-58.

       In the instant case, the defendant has offered no reason why he should be entitled to

information beyond that contemplated by the Supreme Court in the run-of-the-mill drug-sniffing

dog case. He relies on United States v. Thomas, 726 F.3d 1086 (9th Cir. 2013), Motion at 8-9,

                                                  3
    Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 4 of 6                                  PageID #: 98



but incorrectly characterizes that opinion as “affirm[ing] the importance of the types of requests

made herein[,]” id. at 8. In Thomas, the Ninth Circuit directed the district courts in that circuit to

provide the following information when a defendant “requests dog-history discovery to pursue a

motion to suppress”: the handler’s log, training records and score sheets, certification records,

and training standards and manuals pertaining to the dog in question. Thomas. 726 F.3d at 1096.

This list clearly does not include records of a different dog previously handled by the same

officer, or any records of other sniff searches by the dog in question. The government had

produced the listed documents, but they were heavily redacted, and that alone was the basis of

the Ninth Circuit’s reversal of the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion to suppress. Id.

at 1098. There has been no suggestion of redaction in this case; indeed, the government

represents that the records provided are “un-redacted.” Objection at 4.

         The defendant lists “several salient facts” that he contends that the government does not

contest at pages 2-3 of his reply memorandum, all of which are drawn from the affidavit of his

expert witness, Steven Nicely. All of these “facts,” as well as the opinions included in several of

them, were ascertained by Nicely without resort to the additional evidence sought by the

defendant. The only exception is the final item in the list, which reports that Nicely wishes to

compare the training records of the previous dog with which Aros’s handler worked “in order to

establish the differences in the training of each dog, and to determine if there were deficiencies

in Aros’ training.” Reply at 3. The defendant makes no showing that differences in the training

of each dog would necessarily demonstrate deficiencies in the training of Aros.1 That is a




1
  I reject the defendant’s assertion that “[t]hese facts should be deemed admitted when this Court enters an Order on
the Defendant’s Motion. The Government has not contradicted these facts, or presented its own expert in
opposition.” Reply at 3. In this court, in criminal cases at the pretrial stage, facts are established only by written
stipulation signed by all parties or at an evidentiary hearing. Neither has yet occurred in this case.

                                                          4
    Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 5 of 6                             PageID #: 99



necessary threshold issue to be determined before the demand for such evidence may be

considered.

        According to this court’s research, Nicely has been able in the past to testify that drug-

sniffing dogs were inadequately trained and that their alerts were false positives based on

information no more extensive than that which has already been made available in this case. For

example, in the Eastern District of Louisiana, Nicely testified earlier this year that a narcotics

detection dog who alerted to several areas of the defendant’s vehicle during two passes after a

highway stop was inadequately trained and was cued to alert by his handler, based on a video

recording of the sniff. United States v. Guyton, Criminal Action No. 11-271, 2013 WL 2394895,

at *6-*8 (E.D. La. Apr. 16, 2013).

        Nicely testified similarly at a suppression hearing in United States v. Lindsay, Cause No.

A-13-CR-032-LY, 2013 WL 3864675 (W.D. Tex. July 24, 2013).                           He reviewed the dog’s

training records and a video of the dog’s alert. Id. at *3. Nicely testified that he does not agree

with the Supreme Court’s ruling in Harris, id. at *7, but that opinion is binding on this court.

There is no suggestion in the Lindsay opinion that Nicely sought additional evidence, like that

sought here, in order to bolster his opinions.2

        On the showing made, the defendant is not entitled to production of the evidence sought

in this motion. See also United States v. Poole, No. CR13-3003-MWB, 2013 WL 3808243, at *9

(N.D. Iowa July 22, 2013) (applying Harris to expert testimony that handler committed errors

while deploying drug-detection dog and that dog did not genuinely indicate presence of drugs);

United States v. Salgado, No. CR 12-30088-OL-02-RAL, 2013 WL 1348264, at *7-*8 (D.S.D.

Apr. 1, 2013) (applying Harris to deny defendant access to “real-world records” of a drug-

2
 The presiding judge also noted that “Nicely’s behavioral-science approach to detection-dog training has not been
adopted by the courts or the law-enforcement community as either a recognized method or the standard for
analyzing the reliability of drug-detection dogs.” 2013 WL 3864675 at *8.

                                                       5
Case 2:13-cr-00048-DBH Document 35 Filed 10/22/13 Page 6 of 6                     PageID #: 100



detection dog). Nicely can present his opinions without access to the additional information that

the defendant has requested.

                                           Conclusion

       For the foregoing reasons, the defendant’s motion for discovery is DENIED.



                                            NOTICE

       In accordance with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 72(a), a party may serve and file
an objection to this order within fourteen (14) days after being served with a copy thereof.

         Failure to file a timely objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to review by the
district court and to any further appeal of this order.


       Dated this 22nd day of October, 2013.

                                                     /s/ John H. Rich III
                                                     John H. Rich III
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge




                                                6
