                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                 )
                                         )
      v.                                 )
                                         )         1:12-cr-00163-JAW
DARLENE FORD                             )


                       ORDER ON MOTION IN LIMINE

      In 2004, James F. Ford and Darlene Ford were living as husband and wife in

Wakefield, Massachusetts, when the police executed a search warrant of their

premises. The search included both their residence and a home across the street to

which they had access and revealed a substantial marijuana grow operation. Mr.

Ford, but not Ms. Ford, was charged and convicted of a state felony, possession of

marijuana with the intent to distribute. Ms. Ford now faces federal charges in the

District of Maine for engaging in a conspiracy with her husband to manufacture

marijuana, maintaining a drug-involved place, and aiding and abetting Mr. Ford’s

unlawful possession of a firearm. She seeks to obtain a pretrial ruling forbidding

the Government from admitting evidence of the events in Massachusetts in 2004.

Because evidence of the events in 2004 is relevant to her knowledge of her

husband’s prohibited status for purposes of the firearms charge, the Court

concludes that the evidence is admissible on the firearms charge. Because evidence

of her involvement with the marijuana grow operation has special relevance to the

drug charges and because its probative value is not outweighed by unfair prejudice,

the evidence is admissible under Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b), subject to a



                                         1
limiting instruction. The Court denies the Defendant’s motion in limine seeking

exclusion.

I.     STATEMENT OF FACTS

       With trial scheduled to start on Tuesday, February 4, 2014, Darlene Ford

filed a motion in limine on Friday, January 31, 2014, to exclude evidence of co-

defendant James F. Ford’s conduct leading to his 2004 commonwealth of

Massachusetts conviction for possession of marijuana with the intent to distribute.

Def.’s Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 301) (Def.’s Mot.). The Government responded on

Monday, February 3, 2014. Gov’t’s Resp. in Opp’n to Def.’s Mot. in Limine (ECF No.

306) (Gov’t’s Opp’n).

       Darlene Ford stands charged with three federal felonies: (1) conspiring with

others, including James F. Ford, her husband, to manufacture 100 or more

marijuana plants; (2) maintaining a drug involved premises in Monroe, Maine; and

(3) aiding and abetting James F. Ford’s illegal possession of a firearm. 1

Superseding Indictment (ECF No. 80). Mr. Ford’s prohibited status arises from a

2004 Massachusetts felony conviction for the possession of marijuana with the

intent to distribute. Id. at 4; Jury Verdict Form at 2 (ECF No. 250).

       This is the second jury trial for Ms. Ford on these charges. In September

2013, on the third day of trial, the jury deadlocked and the Court declared a

mistrial. Order (ECF No. 208). At the prior trial, the Government called as a

1      James F. Ford was also charged in the same indictment with four counts: (1) conspiracy to
manufacture marijuana; (2) manufacture of marijuana; (3) maintaining a drug involved premises;
and (4) being a felon in possession of a firearm. Superseding Indictment (ECF No. 80). On
November 21, 2013, a federal jury convicted Mr. Ford of each charged crime. Verdict Form (ECF No.
250).

                                               2
witness James Bruce, a Massachusetts state trooper, who investigated the

circumstances surrounding the 2004 conviction. Partial Tr. of Proceedings at 117,

126-36 (ECF No. 226) (Bruce Test.). Trooper Bruce testified that on October 11,

2002, he participated in the execution of a search warrant for 2 Fellsmere Avenue,

Wakefield, Massachusetts. Id. 126:6-17. He said that he arrived at the residence

and knocked on the door, but no one answered.          Id.   Through his previous

investigation, he was aware that the house across the street at 5 Fellsmere Avenue

was also associated with the operation at 2 Fellsmere; he went across the street and

knocked on the door at 5 Fellsmere. Id. 126:18-21. After there was no answer at 5

Fellsmere, he returned to 2 Fellsmere and, using a battering ram, made a forced

entry into 2 Fellsmere. Id. 126:22-24. The house at 2 Fellsmere was not inhabited.

Id. 127:1-2. However, inside 2 Fellsmere, there was a strong odor of marijuana, but

he could not enter the second floor of the house because a locked grate blocked

access. Id. 127:3-7.

      While pondering how to get beyond the locked grate, Trooper Bruce noticed

that the Defendant and her husband had pulled into the driveway at 5 Fellsmere.

Id. 127:10-14. Mr. Ford came over the 2 Fellsmere and unlocked the grate. Id.

127:17-22.   Once on the second floor, Trooper Bruce discovered an extensive

marijuana grow operation, consisting of over 100 plants in three different rooms

complete with grow lamps, periodicals on how to grow marijuana, a digital scale and

similar items. Id. 127:23-128:6.




                                         3
      After completing the search of 2 Fellsmere, Trooper Bruce went across the

road to 5 Fellsmere, but the Fords had left. Id. 128:20-24. Trooper Bruce noticed

the odor of marijuana coming from 5 Fellsmere and went inside. Id. 128:24-129:1-3.

Although he was able to enter the second floor at 5 Fellsmere, he found his way to a

second story bedroom blocked by a locked grate similar to the one at 2 Fellsmere.

Id. 129:1-8. Within another ungated bedroom, Trooper Bruce said he found maybe

two dozen marijuana plants. Id. 129:9-12. The Trooper was ultimately able to gain

access to the gated bedroom and found a butcher-block table consistent with use for

marijuana preparation. Id. 129:14-21. Inside this room was a stairway that led to a

third floor, where there were two more rooms of growing marijuana plants,

complete with a filtration system and heat lamps. Id. 129:22-130-1. Trooper Bruce

said that the bedroom at 5 Fellsmere across from the barricaded door was James

and Darlene’s bedroom. Id. 130:11-24.

II.   THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

      A.     Darlene Ford’s Motion

      Darlene Ford acknowledges that evidence of James F. Ford’s 2004 felony

conviction is admissible at trial, but she objects to evidence of the facts underlying

the conviction. Def.’s Mot. at 1. Ms. Ford contends that this evidence would be

admissible only under Rule of Evidence 404(b) and, citing Huddleston v. United

States, 485 U.S. 681 (1988), Ms. Ford objects to allowing the Government to “parade

past the jury a litany of potentially prejudicial similar acts that have been

established or connected to the defendant only by unsubstantiated innuendo.” Id.



                                          4
at 689. Ms. Ford maintains that there is no evidence that she knew about Mr.

Ford’s status as a felon or his interest in growing marijuana. Def.’s Mot. at 3. She

is worried that the jury will use Trooper Bruce’s evidence to conclude that Ms. Ford

is a bad person or that she has criminal propensities. Id. at 3-4.

       B.    The Government’s Response

       In its response, the Government disagrees that Trooper Bruce’s testimony

about the 2004 search would be admissible only under Rule of Evidence 404(b).

Gov’t’s Opp’n at 1-2. The Government points out that it is required to prove to the

jury that Ms. Ford knew that her husband had been previously convicted of a

felony. Id. at 2. The Government argues that evidence of the extensive nature of

the 2004 grow operation is probative evidence from which a jury could infer that

Ms. Ford knew that her husband was later convicted of the Massachusetts

marijuana felony. Id.

       The Government also contends that Trooper Bruce’s testimony is admissible

under Rule 404(b) to prove Ms. Ford’s knowledge, intent and absence of mistake or

accident with regard to the conspiracy and drug premises charges. Id. at 2-3. The

Government says that this evidence is particularly relevant to Count III, the drug

premises count, because it includes a “willful blindness” scienter element. Id. at 4.

III.   DISCUSSION

       A.    The Firearms Charge

       In order to prove that Darlene Ford aided and abetted the possession of a

firearm by a felon, namely her husband, James F. Ford, the Government must



                                          5
prove that Ms. Ford knew that James F. Ford had been convicted of a felony. 2

United States v. Gardner, 488 F.3d 700, 716 (6th Cir. 2007). To prove that Ms. Ford

knew her husband was a felon, the Government intends to produce evidence: (1)

that Ms. Ford was married to James F. Ford; (2) that they were living together; (3)

that there was a significant marijuana grow at their home in Wakefield,

Massachusetts in 2004; (4) that there was a significant marijuana grow in the home

to which her husband had access across the street from their home in Wakefield; (5)

that Ms. Ford drove in the driveway of their home while the police were searching

the home across the street; (6) that Mr. Ford was charged with the Massachusetts

felony of cultivating marijuana; and (7) that he was convicted of that charge. These

facts, including the nature and extent of the marijuana grow in Wakefield,

Massachusetts in 2004 would go directly to whether Ms. Ford had knowledge that

her husband was a convicted felon. On the firearms charge, therefore, this evidence

is not evidence of other crimes or bad acts under Rule 404(b) on the part of Ms.

Ford. It is instead direct evidence that goes to her knowledge of his prohibited

status.    On this issue, it clearly meets the Rule 403 standard for admissibility

because its probative value of her knowledge of his felony status is not

“substantially outweighed by a danger of . . . unfair prejudice, confusion of the

issues, misleading the jury, undue delay, wasting time, or needlessly presenting

cumulative evidence.” FED. R. EVID. 403.

2       “With regard to aiding and abetting a felon in possession of a firearm, there is a circuit split
as to whether the aider and abettor must know or should have known that the principal was a
convicted felon.” United States v. Ecklin, 837 F. Supp. 2d 589, 592 (E.D. Va. 2011) (discussing cases).
Here, the Government concedes that it must prove that Ms. Ford knew or had reason to know that
James F. Ford was a convicted felon. Gov’t’s Req. Jury Instrucs. at 11-12 (ECF No. 276).

                                                   6
      B.     The Marijuana Charges

      Evidence of the facts underlying the 2004 marijuana charge against James F.

Ford is admissible in the drug charges against Darlene Ford under Federal Rule of

Evidence 404(b). Ms. Ford was not charged with any crime in 2004, but according

to Trooper Bruce’s testimony, she was living in a house where marijuana was being

grown. This testimony, if believed by the jury, would be evidence of Ms. Ford’s

commission of a prior bad or criminal act, not probative of her bad character or

propensity to commit the charged crimes, but admissible to prove her knowledge,

intent, preparation, plan, and absence of mistake.

      Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) requires that “[e]vidence of a crime, wrong,

or other act is not admissible to prove a person's character in order to show that on

a particular occasion the person acted in accordance with the character.” The First

Circuit directs that courts engage in a two-step process when evaluating evidence of

prior acts under Rule 404(b). United States v. Varoudakis, 233 F.3d 113, 118 (1st

Cir. 2000). “First, the evidence must have ‘special relevance’ to an issue in the case

such as intent or knowledge, and must not include ‘bad character or propensity as a

necessary link in the inferential chain.’” Id. (quoting United States v. Frankhauser,

80 F.3d 641, 648 (1st Cir. 1996)). “Second, under [Federal] Rule [of Evidence] 403,

evidence that is specially relevant may still be excluded if its probative value is

substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.” Id.

       Rule 404(b) contains an important limitation. “Rule 404(b) does not exclude

evidence of prior crimes of persons other than the defendant.” United States v.



                                          7
Gonzalez-Sanchez, 825 F.2d 572, 583 (1st Cir. 1987). This last limitation on Rule

404(b)’s scope means that Ms. Ford cannot invoke the Rule to exclude testimony

about James F. Ford’s relevant prior acts themselves as evidence of Ms. Ford’s bad

character or propensity. The Rule simply does not reach that far.

      At the same time, Trooper Bruce’s testimony is probative of Ms. Ford’s own

culpability for the events of 2004; it tends to show that she conspired with or aided

and abetted James F. Ford’s criminal conduct.        To that extent, the proffered

testimony requires a Rule 404(b) analysis because it is evidence of Darlene Ford’s

own prior criminal acts.

      The Court concludes that evidence of the prior marijuana grow operation in

the Fords’ home in 2004 in Massachusetts has special relevance for Count One, the

marijuana manufacturing conspiracy count, and for Count Three, the drug-involved

premises count. This evidence of the events underlying the police search of the

Fords’ Massachusetts residence could be viewed by a jury as probative of Ms. Ford’s

knowledge of marijuana, its distinctive odor, and its growing requirements, the

equipment and methods to successfully grow marijuana, her husband’s interest in

marijuana production, and other factors relevant to the Government’s charges. This

evidence also bears on Ms. Ford’s intent and lack of mistake or accident. All of

these are permissible purposes for admission under Rule 404(b).

      Finally, the Court must also determine whether the probative value of the

evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. FED. R.

EVID. 403. Virtually all evidence that the Government puts on against a criminal



                                         8
defendant is “prejudicial” in some sense; if not, the prosecutor would be unlikely to

present it. The concern that Rule 403 addresses is the risk of unfair prejudice; for

example, the risk that the jury might be tempted to convict the defendant for

reasons unrelated to evidence of the crimes charged in the indictment. It is true

that there is some risk of unfair prejudice to Ms. Ford if the jury hears testimony of

James F. Ford’s prior criminal activities in Massachusetts.       The jury might be

tempted to convict Ms. Ford because in 2004 she was married to a lawbreaker.

However, this slight risk of unfair prejudice is outweighed by the probative value of

the evidence, particularly in light of the likely similar evidence of James F. Ford’s

marijuana grow operation in Monroe.

      Moreover, there is some risk that a jury will view evidence of Ms. Ford’s close

association with a marijuana grow operation in Massachusetts to conclude that she

is a person of bad character or a person with a propensity to commit crimes. Upon

request of the Defendant, the Court will instruct the jury as to the limited purposes

for which it may use this evidence in considering the drug charges and, in any

event, that the members of the jury may not use this evidence as character

evidence.

      The Court DENIES Darlene Ford’s Motion in Limine (ECF No. 301).

      SO ORDERED.


                                 /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                  JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                 CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 4th day of February, 2014

                                          9
