                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                        DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS
__________________________________________
                                           )
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                  )
                                           )
                                           )
                                           )
            v.                             )   Criminal No. 13-10097-DJC
                                           )
ERNEST FIELDS,                             )
                                           )
            Defendant.                     )
                                           )
__________________________________________)

                                MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

CASPER, J.                                                                        June 11, 2014

I.       Introduction

         Defendant Ernest Fields (“Fields”) has moved to suppress the fruits of the search of his

person on September 12, 2012.       D. 40.    Having considered the motion, the government’s

opposition, D. 48, the evidence (including testimony and exhibits) presented at the evidentiary

hearing on the motion and oral argument D. 49, 56, and the supplement filings, D. 54, 55, the

Court DENIES the motion. Accordingly, the Court makes its findings of fact and legal analysis

below.

II.      Findings of Fact

         These findings are based upon the testimony of Boston Police Department (“BPD”)

Officers Joseph Fisher and Steven Dodd who testified at the suppression hearing and the exhibits

introduced at that hearing.

         On September 12, 2012 in the early morning hours, several officers of the BPD were on

patrol in Roxbury in the area in and around Madison Park High School (“Madison Park” or “the

school”). Members of the B-2 squad had been informed at the beginning of the shift by Sergeant

                                                1 
 
McCarthy that there had been a complaint from the Department of Youth and Families (located

in the Madison Park complex) that people had been gathering at the back of the school and that

there may have been drug activity and some overnight sleeping in that area.

       With this information, BPD officers from the B-2 district headed to the area of Madison

Park as part of their patrol. Around 1:30 a.m., BPD Officers Dodd, Hunter and McCarthy drove

to the rear of the Madison Park complex and saw eight to ten individuals including one whom

Dodd recognized to be gang-involved. Dodd did not see Fields as part of his initial observation

of this group. Dodd and the other two officers set up surveillance in this area and requested the

assistance of other officers, including Officers Dias, MacDougall and Jackson, to assist with such

surveillance. These officers set up surveillance in vehicles in various locations around the

school. At some point, Dodd and Hunter get out of their vehicle and walked up closer to the

school’s athletic field where they heard a group of male voices from the top of the field toward

Madison Park. After these observations, Dodd and Hunter walked on the field and toward

Madison Park, but did not find anyone. These two officers made their way to the front of the

school and radioed to the other units to cover the front of the school. As they made their way

closer to Malcolm X Boulevard, they heard a group of voices moving toward Roxbury Heritage

Park (“the Park”). Given that it was around 1:30, 1:40 in the morning and the area was otherwise

deserted and the officers had heard the group of voices moving from Madison Park toward the

Park, Officer Dodd believed that the group moving toward the Park was the same one that they

had observed earlier. Again, Officer Dodd radioed that the group may be moving toward

Roxbury Street. One of the officers to respond to this radio call was Officer Fisher.

       Officer Fisher, working with a K-9 unit, was also on routine patrol in the area. On the

police radio, he had heard the other officers observing a group at and then leaving Madison Park,



                                                2 
 
heading toward the Park. He was aware that the Park closes after dark so that anyone there at

that time would be trespassing. He headed to Roxbury Street and parked on the street, behind

the Park, facing up the street. At this location, Officer Fisher continued to listen to the radio

transmissions. Shortly thereafter, he observed a group of six to eight individuals coming from

the direction of the Park (and reasonably assumed that they were coming from the Park) and

walk onto to Roxbury Street, where he was parked. All but one of these individuals turned right,

heading down the street away from where he was parked. One of the group, an individual later

identified as the Defendant, Fields, turned left and headed up the street toward where Fisher’s

marked police cruiser was parked.

       Fields was wearing a white T-shirt, jeans and was carrying a cell phone. As Fisher was

passing the cruiser, Officer Fisher got out of the vehicle, heading toward the back of the vehicle

and called out to Fields, “Hey, what’s going on tonight?” Fields turned back toward the officer

to respond so that they were approximately three feet apart during this exchange. Fields said that

he was heading to his mother’s house. When Officer Fisher asked where that residence was

located, Fields responded with an address which the officer could not recall, but which was in the

general direction in which he was headed. As the exchange continued, Fisher observed that the

conversation became “one-sided” as Fields offered that he was not comfortable with the police

and that they made him nervous, even showing that his hands were shaking. Fields mentioned

something about the police having killed someone in the South End. Although the officer had

not mentioned searching him, Fields warned the officer that he would need a reason to search

him. Officer Fisher observed that Fields had become animated and repetitive in his comments.

At this point, the officer had made no commands to Fields, had not requested any identification,




                                                3 
 
had no physical contact with him, had not blocked his path down the street and he had kept his

firearm holstered throughout the exchange.

       Given the nature and tone of Fields’ comments and his observations of his agitation,

Fisher became concerned and, using the radio on his police vest, requested backup from other

officers. Within a minute, several other officers—BPD Officers Dodd, Hunter, MacDougall and

Dias--arrived on the scene. Although Fisher’s testimony differed in some respects from Dodd’s

about where the other officers came to stand when they arrived, Fisher testified, credibly, that

even with the initial arrival of these other officers (who came across Malcolm X Boulevard and

went up the stairs that led toward the Park and Roxbury Street), there was nothing between

Fields and egress down the street. Dodd also testified, credibly, that none of the four officers

who arrived to assist stood directly in front of Fields when they came upon Fisher and Fields on

Roxbury Street.    As Fields’ demeanor had changed during the course of his one-on-one

conversation with Fisher, his demeanor changed once the officers arrived (e.g., Fields said

something to the effect to Officer Fisher that “your boys are here now”) and he appeared

agitated.

       After the arrival of the other officers, Fields went to put the cell phone he had been

carrying into his front pocket. When he lifted up his long, white T-shirt to do so, both Officers

Fisher and Dodd saw what appeared to be the clip of a pocket knife at his front pocket. Upon

this sighting, Officer Dodd moved in front of Fields, explaining that Fields had a knife that

needed to be removed from his person and that he was going to pat-frisk him. As the officer

moved his hand toward Fields to do so, Fields pushed his hand away. Officer Dodd moved

toward him again to make another attempt and Fields then slapped Officer Dodd’s hand away.

Upon Officer Dodd’s request for assistance, two of the other officers, Officers Fisher and



                                               4 
 
Hunter, moved in to assist by taking each of Fields’ wrists and securing his arms so that Officer

Dodd could remove the knife. With Officers Fisher and Hunter assisting in this way, Officer

Dodd did a pat-frisk of Fields and removed the knife, but also felt a firearm in Fields’ waistband.

Dodd then had Officers Fisher and Hunter handcuff Fields and, after some struggle with Fields,

Officer Dodd removed the firearm from his waistband. Fisher secured the gun and Dodd took

Fields to the police wagon. Later during booking, Fields made an unsolicited statement, in the

presence of Sergeant McCarthy that he carried a gun to protect himself from police after

someone was shot in the South End.         Fields was charged with various charges including

trespassing, assault and battery on a police officer, resisting arrest, and various dangerous

weapon and firearms charges.

III. Discussion

    A. The Police’s Interaction with Fields Began with a Consensual Encounter

    A key contention between the parties is when any seizure of Fields by the police occurred on

September 12, 2012. It is well settled that there is no seizure implicating the Fourth Amendment

where police make inquiries of individual. United States v. Drayton, 536 U.S. 194, 200-01

(2002) (noting that “[l]aw enforcement officers do not violate the Fourth Amendment’s

prohibition on unreasonable seizures merely by approaching individuals on the street or in other

public places and putting questions to them if they are willing to listen”); see United States v.

Cardoza, 129 F.3d 6, 15 (1st Cir. 1997); United States v. Sealey, 30 F.3d 7, 9-10 (1st Cir. 1994).

Such a consensual encounter, unlike an investigatory stop that requires reasonable suspicion or

an arrest that requires probable cause, “may be initiated without any objective level of

suspicion.” United States v. Gross, 662 F.3d 393, 398 (6th Cir. 2011) (internal quotations

omitted). To find that any such encounter rose to a seizure, a court “must be able to conclude



                                                5 
 
that coercion, not voluntary compliance, most accurately describes the encounter.” United States

v. Smith, 423 F.3d 25, 28 (1st Cir. 2005) (citing United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 553

(1980)). To make such a determination, the Court must look at the totality of circumstances,

applying an objective, reasonable person standard: “whether the officer’s words and actions

would have conveyed [restriction of movement] to a reasonable person.” California v. Hodari

D., 499 U.S. 621, 628 (1991); Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 438 (1991) (noting that this

objective standard “presupposes an innocent person”). That is, “a consensual encounter becomes

a seizure when ‘in view of all of the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person

would have believed that he was not free to leave.’” Gross, 662 F.3d at 398-99 (quoting

Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 554). In making this determination, the Court may consider such

factors as “the threatening presence of several officers, the display of a weapon by an officer,

some physical touching of the person of the citizen, or the use of language or tone of voice

indicating that compliance with the officer’s request might be compelled.” Mendenhall, 446

U.S. at 554; see Bostick, 501 U.S. at 439 (noting that “seizure analysis requires consideration of

all relevant circumstances”).

       Here, Officer Fisher’s initial interaction with Fisher was a consensual encounter. The

officer asked Fields what was going on and where he was headed. Cardoza, 129 F.3d at 15

(finding no seizure even where officers asked defendant a “more demanding and pointed”

question than in Sealey including “why are you out at this time of night?” and did so after

driving the wrong way down a one-way street indicating the officers’ intention to make contact

with the defendant); Sealey, 30 F.3d at 8-10 (finding no seizure where officer shouted “what’s

up” and, in response, the defendant fled). Fields’ agitation and unsolicited commentary about his

discomfort around police and the police having shot someone in the South End during this one-



                                                6 
 
on-one interaction caused Fisher to summons backup assistance from other officers. The defense

argues that the arrival of the other officers turned this encounter into a stop and seizure.

Although Officers Fisher and Dodd gave different accounts of where the officers were standing

when they arrived, the totality of circumstances indicate that a seizure, necessitating at least

reasonable suspicion, did not occur at this juncture. Whether the officers were standing as

Officer Fisher indicated or as Officers Dodd indicated, compare Exh. B (chalk reflecting Officer

Fisher’s testimony) with Exh. C (chalk reflecting Officer Dodd’s testimony), it remained the

case that even upon the arrival of the other officers, Officer Fisher was the only one talking (and

there was no evidence that the officer accused Fields of any wrongdoing and, in fact, Fields was

the one who raised the issue of a search), he had made no commands to Fields, no requests for

identification, his firearm remained holstered and none of the officers spoke to Fields or came to

stand directly in front of Fields. Fields still also had a means of egress. See Smith, 423 F.3d at

30 (holding that there was no seizure and rejecting the district court’s finding that “effectively

[the police] surrounded [the defendant]” where the “evidence established that [the officers] stood

where they had to, given that the telephone pole was in front of [the defendant], and that [the

defendant] could have moved in a variety of directions”). That is, whether Officer Fisher’s

memory of the positioning of the officers controls or that of Officers Dodd’s does, see Exhs. B-

C, it remains the case that the officers, to assist Officer Fisher, had to stand somewhere in his

vicinity and could only do so around or behind the car and Fields still had point of egress either

up or down, respectively, the street. Moreover, although there were now multiple officers on the

scene, such presence does not automatically convert the encounter into a seizure, see United

States v. Goddard, 491 F.3d 457, 461 (D. C. Cir. 2007) and that is particularly true here where




                                                7 
 
only a single officer, Officer Fisher, had any active interaction with Fields before the spotting of

the knife on his person.

       At this point, there was still no show of authority by the police. Even in the absence of any

command by the police, Fields continued to display agitation and to comment on his discomfort

with the police. When he went to put his cell phone in his pocket, both Officers Fisher and Dodd

credibly testified that they saw the clip of a knife in his pocket. As Officer Dodd moved in to

remove the knife,1 advising Fields that he was going to do so as he attempted to do so, Fields

swatted his hand away on the first attempt and again as the officer made a second attempt to do

so. It was only after Officer Dodd had the assistance of other officers in holding Fields that he

was able to remove the knife.

       B. Seizure of Fields Upon Removal of Knife

              The government argues that even as Officer Dodd’s initial attempts to remove the knife

were a show of authority, there was no seizure of Fields until he submitted to such authority.

That is, there is only a seizure if there is a show of force by the police and the defendant submits

to that authority. Hodari D., 499 U.S. at 629; see, e.g., United States v. Holloway, 499 F.3d 114,

117 (1st Cir. 2007) (finding no seizure where officers ordered the defendant Holloway not to

move, he ran, removing and attempting to discard a firearm from his waistband as he ran since

he “never submitted to the officers’ show of authority” and, therefore, “was not actually seized

until the officers physically overpowered and handcuffed him”); Sealey, 30 F.3d at 10 (finding




                                                            
1
   In addition to Officer Dodd’ testimony about being aware that it is a crime to carry a dangerous weapon while
wanted on warrants, see discussion below, Officer Dodd also testified that he was aware that there was a city
ordinance prohibiting the carrying of a knife that is more than 2.5” long. Officer Dodd also testified that he
observed the indentation of the knife and believed that the knife was more than 2.5” long, but even if he had not so
testified, I credit his testimony that he was going to remove given his knowledge of the ordinance and the unfolding
observations about Fields’ statements about the police and agitation.

                                                               8 
 
no seizure where the defendant “resisted [officer], . . . ran away, and ignored any authority that

the officer manifested”).

    Here, even as Officer Dodd announced that he was going to remove the knife and moved into

to do so, Fields did not submit to this action as he swatted away the officer’s hand not once, but

twice. It was only after this resistance and two other officers holding his arms to allow Officer

Dodd to remove the knife that there was a seizure. On this record, the officer who felt what

appeared to be a firearm was justified in the pat-down given Fields’ behavior including the

assault and battery on Officer Dodd for which the officers now had probable cause to arrest. See

United States v. Bizier, 111 F.3d 214, 217 (1st Cir. 1997) (where the police had probable cause to

arrest on a charge of driving under the influence, the search of the defendant’s person was a

lawful search incident to arrest). Accordingly, there was no unlawful seizure in violation of the

Fourth Amendment.

       C. Inevitable Discovery

    As an alternative argument, the government argues that the police would have inevitably

discovered the firearm on Fields’ person if they had retrieved the knife from him, but there was

no pat-frisk leading to the firearm at that time. Officer Dodd testified that if an individual is

wanted on warrant(s) and has a knife, he can be arrested for being armed while wanted. See

Mass. Gen. L. c. 269, § 10(b) (defining crimes including the crime of carrying a dangerous

weapon “when arrested upon a warrant for an alleged crime”) Accordingly, once a knife is

found, as Officer Dodd explained, the standard procedure is for the police to obtain the person’s

identity and run it to see if he has any warrants pending. If warrants were discovered, then the

defendant would have been arrested on this charge and incident to such arrest, the police would

have searched him and (inevitably) found his firearm. The defense disputes that there would



                                                9 
 
have been grounds to make such a charge here where a folding knife would not necessarily

constitute a “dangerous weapon” for the purposes of a 10(b) charge under state law. Compare

Commonwealth v. Turner, 59 Mass. App. Ct. 825 (2003) (noting that folding knives, at least

those without a locking device, are typically not regarded as “dangerous per se”) with

Commonwealth v. Wynton W., 459 Mass. 745, 754 n. 5 (2011) (addressing this “stray comment”

in Turner and concluding that whether a knife is “dangerous per se” turns on “whether the knife

is ‘designed for the purpose of bodily assault or defense’ and ‘to produce death or great bodily

harm,’ or whether it has some other useful purpose and is only dangerous when used in a

dangerous fashion”). Without resolving this issue unequivocally, the Court concludes that as the

circumstances unfolded here, it was reasonable for the officers, at a minimum, to believe that the

knife observed and seized here would constitute a dangerous weapon for the purposes of § 10(b)

charge where Fields, who was agitated and expressing distrust and displeasure with police, was

wearing it on his waistband where it was concealed, but readily accessible. That is, on this

record, the Court agrees that the record supports the conclusion that if the police had otherwise

seized the firearm, discovered the outstanding warrant for Fields’ arrest, they would have had

probable cause to charge him with being armed while wanted and would have inevitably

recovered the firearm during any pat-frisk incident to his arrest on that charge.

IV.    Conclusion

       For all of the aforementioned reasons, the Fields’ motion to suppress, D. 40, is DENIED.

So Ordered.
                                                              /s/ Denise J. Casper
                                                              United States District Judge




                                                 10 
 
