                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                              DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
        v.                             )     1:12-cr-00163-JAW
                                       )
DARLENE FORD                           )


     ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL
                      AND FOR NEW TRIAL

        On February 6, 2014, a federal jury convicted Darlene Ford of conspiracy to

manufacture marijuana, knowingly maintaining a residence for the purpose of

manufacturing marijuana, and aiding and abetting a felon in possession of a

firearm. Ms. Ford renews in writing her oral motion for a judgment of acquittal

under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29(a), arguing that the evidence does not

support a guilty verdict on any of the counts of conviction. In the alternate, Ms.

Ford moves for a new trial under Criminal Rule 33.       Concluding that the trial

evidence was sufficient to support the convictions on all three counts and that the

Court did not err in allowing Trooper James Bruce to testify about the

circumstances leading up to Mr. Ford’s 2004 Massachusetts felony conviction, the

Court denies both motions.

I.      LEGAL STANDARD

        In ruling on a motion for judgment of acquittal, the Court must view the

evidence in the light most favorable to the Government and draw all reasonable

inferences in the Government’s favor. United States v. Lara, 181 F.3d 183, 200 (1st

Cir. 1999); United States v. Andrade, 94 F.3d 9, 12 (1st Cir. 1996).    The Court
should deny the motion if the evidence, viewed in this manner, is sufficient to

permit a jury to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. United States v. Doe, 921

F.2d 340, 343 (1st Cir. 1990).      However, the verdict may not “‘rest on mere

suspicion, speculation, or conjecture, or on an overly attenuated piling of inference

on inference.’” United States v. Rojas Alvarez, 451 F.3d 320, 333 (1st Cir. 2006)

(quoting United States v. Pettigrew, 77 F.3d 1500, 1521 (5th Cir. 1996)). “[E]vidence

is insufficient to support a verdict where mere speculation, rather than reasonable

inference, supports the [G]overnment’s case, . . . or where there is a ‘total failure of

proof of [a] requisite element.’” United States v. Nevils, 598 F.3d 1158, 1167 (9th

Cir. 2010) (quoting Briceno v. Scribner, 555 F.3d 1069, 1079 (9th Cir. 2009))

(internal citations omitted).

      A motion for a new trial should be granted only where “‘there would be a

miscarriage of justice . . . and where the evidence preponderates heavily against the

verdict.’” United States v. Wilkerson, 251 F.3d 273, 278 (1st Cir. 2001) (quoting

United States v. Indelicato, 611 F.2d 376, 387 (1st Cir. 1979)). However, absent

evidence of a “manifest injustice,” Criminal Rule 33 is not an appropriate “vehicle to

relitigate evidentiary rulings with which [the defendant] disagrees.” United States

v. Castro, 669 F. Supp. 2d 288, 293 (E.D.N.Y. 2009), aff’d on other grounds, 411 Fed.

App’x 415 (2d Cir. 2011) (unpublished).

II.   FACTS

      A.     Procedural Posture

      A grand jury indicted Ms. Ford on September 14, 2012, Indictment (ECF No.

1), and issued a superseding indictment on April 23, 2013. Superseding Indictment


                                              2
(ECF No. 80). The superseding indictment charged Ms. Ford with conspiracy to

manufacture marijuana (Count One), id. at 1; using and maintaining a premises for

the purpose of manufacturing marijuana (Count Three), id. at 2; and aiding and

abetting her husband James F. Ford, a felon, in possession of two specific firearms

(Count Six). Id. at 4. The Government brought Ms. Ford to trial on these charges

beginning on September 23, 2013, but on September 26, 2013, the Court declared a

mistrial when the jury was unable to reach a verdict. Oral Decl. of Mistrial (ECF

No. 208).

         On November 27, 2013, the Court reset the case for trial to begin on February

4, 2014. Order Granting Mot. to Continue (ECF No. 256). On January 31, 2014,

Ms. Ford filed a motion in limine to exclude the testimony of Massachusetts State

Trooper James Bruce. Def.’s Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 301). The Court denied that

motion on February 4, 2014, the first day of trial. Order on Mot. in Limine (ECF

No. 310). On February 6, 2014, the jury convicted Ms. Ford on all counts. Verdict

Form (ECF No. 318).

         Ms. Ford filed the present motion for acquittal on February 18, 2014. Mot. of

Def. for J. of Acquittal or in the Alternative Mot. for New Trial (ECF No. 327) (Def.’s

Mot.).     The Government responded in opposition on March 6, 2014.             Gov’t’s

Objection and Resp. to Def.’s Mot. for J. of Acquittal (ECF No. 329) (Gov’t’s Opp’n).

Ms. Ford did not reply to the Government’s opposition.

         B.    Evidence at Trial

         On November 15, 2011, agents and officers with the Maine Drug

Enforcement Agency (MDEA) executed a search warrant at the home of Darlene


                                              3
and James F. Ford, located at 360 Swan Lake Avenue in Monroe, Maine.                              The

structure at this address is a large, barn-like metal building.                    The residential

quarters are located in a partial second floor at the back of the structure. Darlene

Ford, her husband James F. Ford, and their two sons, Paul and James T., were all

in the residence at the time the agents executed the search warrant. All four exited

the Ford home when called out by law enforcement officers, who entered the

residence after securing the four Fords.

       On the first floor of 360 Swan Lake Road, the agents discovered a

sophisticated indoor marijuana manufacturing operation. Within the open garage

area of the structure were either three or four enclosed inner structures containing

dozens of live marijuana plants.1             At least two of the grow rooms contained

extensive environmental controls, including controls for temperature, lighting, and

humidity. Another room was apparently a staging area to care for and process the

plants.    Agents found numerous items typically used in connection with the

manufacture of marijuana strewn about the garage and secured on shelving units.

       Agents also located two dismantled assault-style rifles in the garage, hidden

in a compartment beneath a mattress outside the grow rooms.                            In addition,

throughout the garage agents found component parts for other firearms. Count VI

of the superseding indictment alleged that Ms. Ford had aided and abetted James



1       The Court acknowledges some confusion as to whether there were three or four rooms in the
downstairs part of the structure involved in the marijuana grow operation. Without a certified
transcript and the demonstrative exhibits, it is difficult to piece together this part of the evidence.
Whether there were three or four rooms, however, is immaterial to the resolution of the pending
motion.




                                                      4
F. Ford’s possession of two firearms: (1) a Sig Sauer Model 556, 5.56mm caliber

rifle; and (2) a DSA Inc., Model SA 58, 308 caliber rifle. Superseding Indictment at

4. At trial, the Government presented evidence that Ms. Ford had purchased these

two rifles.

       Agents seized numerous other items of evidence, including a computer,

digital camera, and several electronic storage devices. On these items, agents found

still photos of James F. Ford and his two sons shooting the two firearms that had

been seized in the garage. Agents also found a video clip of James F. Ford firing one

of the rifles at a firing range with audio of Ms. Ford narrating as her husband fires

the rifle. One photo showed Ms. Ford standing with Mr. Ford and two other people

in the first floor of the warehouse, directly in front of one of the grow rooms. The

agents also found an email from James F. Ford to Ms. Ford in which he discussed a

number of matters that, viewed in a light most favorable to the Government,

related to the marijuana grow operation.

       Ms. Ford made statements to MDEA Special Agent Allen Weaver in

compliance with the notice requirements of Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436

(1966).   Agent Weaver recorded the interview.             During the interview, Ms. Ford

acknowledged that her husband had been growing marijuana at their home for

several years.2 She acknowledged that she took care of the family finances. When



2       Ms. Ford argued at trial that this admission reflected knowledge that she had gained only
earlier that night when, after the police arrived at the house, her son informed her of the
manufacturing operation on the first floor of her house. However, in view of the jury verdicts, the
Court is not required to accept Ms. Ford’s version of her statement when ruling on her Rule 29
motion, and instead views her statements in a manner consistent with the verdicts.




                                                    5
confronted with her husband’s statements concerning their involvement in growing

and distributing marijuana, Ms. Ford acknowledged the accuracy of his statements.

       Thousands of pages of bank records revealed that Ms. Ford was the only

person to write checks on the multiple bank accounts that she and her husband

owned together.      For example, during approximately two years, she wrote over

$25,000 in checks to the Central Maine Power Company (CMP) to pay the

residential electricity bill for 360 Swan Lake Avenue. A representative of CMP

testified that CMP’s customer service records show no indication of any complaints

or inquiries by Ms. Ford into the amount of her electricity bills. ATF financial

investigator Michael Ballback testified that he analyzed the bank records and

handwritten financial ledgers recovered during the execution of the search warrant,

and that Ms. Ford maintained all of these financial documents. The bank records

and financial ledgers showed that the Fords had made over $500,000 in just over

two years, though neither of them had been lawfully employed.                    Mr. Ballback

further confirmed that the cash deposits into these bank accounts corresponded

with the marijuana “move” dates listed on the calendars found on the first floor of

the Fords’ home.3

       Cassandra Spencer, the former girlfriend of James T. Ford, testified

regarding her conversations with James T. In these conversations, she reported



3       The calendars presented at trial had abbreviations and code words, such as “H” and “M” at
certain regular intervals and “Beantown” in the ledgers corresponding with large cash receipts.
Viewing this evidence in a light most favorable to the Government, the Court concludes that the
regular “H” indication stood for “harvest,” the regular “M” indication stood for “move,” and
“Beantown” referred to Boston, Massachusetts.




                                                   6
that he explained how the “family business” was operated, and he discussed Ms.

Ford’s role as the financial manager of the operation.

      Count VI of the superseding indictment alleged that James F. Ford, Ms.

Ford’s husband, had previously been convicted of a felony, namely a 2004

Massachusetts conviction for possession of marijuana with the intent to

manufacture, distribute, dispense or cultivate.      Superseding Indictment at 4.

Trooper Bruce testified concerning the events surrounding Mr. Ford’s arrest in 2002

and his subsequent conviction in 2004 for state felony marijuana cultivation with

intent to distribute. Trooper Bruce testified that the Fords owned two homes in

Massachusetts across the street from each other and that these homes contained

extensive marijuana grow operations. One of the homes occupied by the Fords had

a room containing multiple marijuana plants near the Fords’ bedroom. Trooper

Bruce testified to the overwhelming odor of marijuana throughout both houses. He

also testified that Ms. Ford was initially present when the search warrant was

being executed at one of the homes. He further testified that one of the homes in

Massachusetts was civilly forfeited to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in

connection with James F. Ford’s felony conviction.

      Ms. Ford took the stand in her own defense. She testified that she did not

know until the day of the search warrant execution that her husband and sons were

growing marijuana in the first floor of her home at 360 Swan Lake Avenue. She

also testified that she did not know that her husband was growing marijuana at

their homes in Massachusetts. She further testified that she did not know her




                                             7
husband was a convicted felon. She admitted that she regularly looked down from

the partial second floor into the warehouse to notify Mr. Ford of phone calls or to

call him to dinner.

III.   DISCUSSION

       A.    Position of the Parties

       Ms. Ford initially frames her legal theory of relief under Rules 29 and 33 as

sufficiency of the evidence.   Def.’s Mot. at 1.   However, her argument focuses

entirely on the Court’s decision to admit the testimony of Trooper Bruce. Id. at 3-5.

She argues that this admission was improper under Federal Rule of Evidence

404(b) because it is not relevant to any act by Ms. Ford, was not offered for a proper

purpose, and was unduly prejudicial to Ms. Ford. Id. The Government responds by

incorporating its previous arguments against the motion in limine. Gov’t’s Opp’n at

5.

       B.    Count One: Conspiracy to Manufacture Marijuana

       To prove the conspiracy alleged in Count One, the Government was required

to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that (1) the agreement to manufacture

marijuana plants specified in the indictment existed between at least two people,

and (2) Darlene Ford wilfully joined in that agreement. 21 U.S.C. § 846; United

States v. Piper, 35 F.3d 611, 614-15 (1st Cir. 1994).     The crime underlying the

conspiracy, manufacturing marijuana, required the Government to prove that one

or more conspirators (1) manufactured marijuana; (2) knew that the substance they

were manufacturing was marijuana; and (3) acted knowingly or intentionally. 21

U.S.C. § 841(a)(1).


                                             8
      The Government’s evidence robustly supports the existence of a conspiracy to

commit the underlying crimes. The Government found at least two concealed grow

rooms full of marijuana plants on the first floor of the warehouse where Darlene

and James F. Ford lived, including an extensive atmosphere control system, and an

additional room for processing. There were many tools and materials related to

hydroponic growing in the area around the enclosed grow rooms. The emails among

Mr. Ford, his sons, and Ms. Ford showed thinly disguised conversations regarding

their roles in the manufacturing operation.

      There was also sufficient evidence that Ms. Ford knew of the operation and

wilfully joined in the conspiracy. She lived directly above the operation; she was

photographed with Mr. Ford on the first floor of the warehouse, outside one of the

enclosed grow rooms; her handwriting was found on the ledgers documenting

movement of the harvested marijuana and receipt of large cash sums. She was the

only one in the family who dealt with bank accounts, and was responsible for

depositing the large cash sums into those bank accounts. Mr. Ford was unemployed

during the time that the family received over $500,000 in income, and the jury could

reasonably have rejected Ms. Ford’s explanation that she thought Mr. Ford was still

employed as an independent contractor working from his workshop in the

warehouse. The exceptionally large electricity bills that Ms. Ford paid to CMP,

without comment or complaint, provide further circumstantial evidence that she

knew of the operation. In short, there was plenty of evidence on which to conclude

that Ms. Ford joined the conspiracy and served as its financial manager.




                                              9
      C.    Count Three: Maintaining a Residence for the Purpose of
            Manufacturing Marijuana

      To obtain a conviction on Count Three, the Government was required to

prove that (1) Ms. Ford knowingly used or maintained the residence at 360 Swan

Lake Avenue, and (2) did so for the purpose of intentionally manufacturing

marijuana plants.   21 U.S.C. § 856(a)(1).    Because the superseding indictment

charged aiding and abetting in the alternate, the Government could also obtain a

conviction by proving that (1) someone else committed the principal crime, and (2)

Ms. Ford consciously shared the other person’s knowledge of the crime, intended to

help him, and that she took part in the endeavor, seeking to make it succeed. 18

U.S.C. § 2; United States v. Spinney, 65 F.3d 231, 234-35 (1st Cir. 1995).      The

Government was permitted to prove that Ms. Ford acted “knowingly” by proving

that she deliberately closed her eyes to a fact that otherwise would have been

obvious to her. United States v. Gabriele, 63 F.3d 61, 66-67 & n.6 (1st Cir. 1995);

United States v. Brandon, 17 F.3d 409, 451-52 & n.72 (1st Cir. 1994).

      The evidence at trial showed that Ms. Ford lived in and maintained at least

the second floor of the warehouse. The same evidence that was sufficient for a jury

to convict her of conspiracy to manufacture marijuana was also sufficient to find

that she used and maintained the whole warehouse for the purpose of

manufacturing marijuana. See Section III.B, supra.

      D.    Count Six: Aiding and Abetting a Felon in Possession of a
            Firearm

      To convict Ms. Ford of aiding and abetting a felon in possession of a firearm,

the Government was required to prove that (1) James F. Ford was convicted in any


                                             10
court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year; (2)

James F. Ford knowingly possessed one or both of the firearms described in the

indictment; (3) the possessed firearm was connected with interstate commerce; (4)

Ms. Ford had reason to know that James F. Ford had been convicted of the felony;

and (5) Ms. Ford consciously shared James F. Ford’s knowledge that he possessed

one or both of the firearms, intended to help him possess it, and took part in the

endeavor, seeking to make it succeed. 18 U.S.C. § 2; Spinney, 65 F.3d at 234-35;

United States v. Bartelho, 71 F.3d 436, 439 (1st Cir. 1995).

      Abundant evidence supported all of these elements. The parties agreed to a

jury instruction that James F. Ford’s Massachusetts marijuana conviction was a

felony within the meaning of the first element.       They also stipulated that the

firearms specified in the indictment moved in interstate commerce. The evidence

showed that Ms. Ford purchased both firearms, and there was video evidence of

James F. Ford shooting one of the firearms with Ms. Ford narrating. The jury could

readily have concluded from this evidence that Ms. Ford intentionally helped James

F. Ford to possess the firearm.

      Ms. Ford testified to the jury that she did not know that Mr. Ford was a

felon, but the jury could reasonably have rejected that claim. Based on Trooper

Bruce’s testimony, the jury could have reasonably found that Ms. Ford was living in

a house in Massachusetts in which James F. Ford, her husband, was growing

marijuana.    In fact, Trooper Bruce testified that the entire house reeked of

marijuana. She was present when Trooper Bruce and his associates executed the




                                             11
search warrant at the Fords’ Massachusetts homes, and Mr. Ford was ultimately

convicted of a felony crime. The commonwealth of Massachusetts seized one of the

two houses in a civil forfeiture proceeding connected to that conviction.

      It is possible that Ms. Ford, as James F. Ford’s wife, was unaware that her

husband had been convicted of a felony. This is what Ms. Ford herself insisted

under oath when she testified. However, the jury could reasonably have rejected

her testimony as implausible. After all, during 2002 to 2004, Mr. and Ms. Ford

were living together as husband and wife; they were living in the same

Massachusetts residence that was being used to grow marijuana and reeked of the

distinct smell of marijuana; there was a marijuana grow operation across the street

in a house that the Fords owned; the state police had come to search the homes; her

husband was later charged and convicted of a marijuana felony; and the Fords lost

one of the houses through civil forfeiture to the commonwealth of Massachusetts.

These cumulated facts would not necessarily compel a finding of knowledge on the

part of Ms. Ford of her husband’s prohibited status, but—taken together—they go

far beyond “mere suspicion, speculation, or conjecture, or on an overly attenuated

piling of inference on inference.” Rojas Alvarez, 451 F.3d at 333 (internal quotations

omitted). In other words, although the inference of knowledge was not the only

possible conclusion, it was a permissible conclusion.

      Ms. Ford takes issue with the Court’s decision to permit Trooper Bruce to

testify as to the events in Massachusetts, but that effort is an attempt to relitigate

the motion in limine. The Court’s order denying that motion is the law of the case,




                                             12
and Ms. Ford has given the Court no grounds to reverse its previous decision.

Order on Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 310).           In short summary, the events in

Massachusetts were relevant to Ms. Ford’s knowledge of James F. Ford’s status as a

felon and to her knowledge of how to grow marijuana; were offered for the proper

purpose of proving an element of one of the charged crimes; and were not unfairly

prejudicial. See id. at 5-9. The Court gave the jury a limiting instruction that they

were to consider the evidence of James F. Ford’s crimes only with respect to Ms.

Ford’s knowledge, and forbade the jury from considering them as evidence of Ms.

Ford’s bad character. Under these circumstances, the Court does not agree with

Ms. Ford that the admission of Trooper Bruce’s testimony worked a manifest

injustice that requires a new trial.

IV.   CONCLUSION

      The Government presented trial evidence sufficient for the jury to convict Ms.

Ford on all three counts, and the Court stands by its decision to allow Trooper

Bruce to testify regarding the events in Massachusetts. The Court DENIES the

Motion of Defendant, Darlene Ford, for Judgment of Acquittal or in the Alternative

Motion for New Trial (ECF No. 327).

      SO ORDERED.



                                       /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                       JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                       CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 31st day of March, 2014




                                            13
