                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                 FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND


UNITED STATES

     v.                                       CR. No. 11-122-ML

SHELTON SMALLS



                       MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

     Petitioner Shelton Smalls (“Smalls”), proceeding pro se, has

filed a motion to vacate, set aside, or correct his sentence

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255, alleging that (1) his Sixth Amendment

Rights were violated because the indictment in his case failed to

charge specific drug weights; (2) his trial counsel was ineffective

because he failed to file a motion to suppress evidence related to

firearms seized at Smalls’ residence; (3) his appellate counsel was

ineffective for not raising the suppression of firearms issue; and

(4) his trial counsel gave Smalls “erroneous advice in regard to

[the] Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA).” § 2255 Petition at page 9.

     For the reasons stated below, Smalls’ motion is denied.

     I.   Background and Travel

     Smalls was arrested on April 26, 2011, after two detectives of

the Providence Police Department observed Smalls conducting a drug

sale in a restaurant parking lot. Smalls and the other individual

involved in the transaction were taken to Central Station, where

Smalls was advised of his constitutional rights and completed a


                                  1
written Rights Form. After detectives informed Smalls that they

knew where he lived, Smalls admitted that he possessed more cocaine

and heroin at his apartment and he completed a “Consent to Search

Form.” Smalls then accompanied the detectives to his apartment,

unlocked a room in which he kept a large safe, and provided the

combination number. Inside the safe, detectives found   a piece of

cocaine base, several bags of heroin, and a bag of cocaine. In

addition, detectives found various drug paraphernalia, a number of

pills, and cash. In the same room, the detectives also found a

revolver, a handgun, and two types of ammunition.    Following the

search, Smalls provided a formal statement in which he admitted

possession of the controlled substances and the firearms. The

individual arrested along with Smalls after the drug transaction

signed a statement in which he admitted that he had arranged to

meet a drug dealer in the restaurant parking lot.

     On July 13, 2011, Smalls was indicted by a grand jury for

(Count I) possession with intent to distribute heroin, in violation

of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(C); (Count II) possession with

intent to distribute cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§

841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(C); (Count III) being a felon in possession of

a firearm, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(1) and 924(a)(2);

and (Count IV) possession of firearms in furtherance of a drug

trafficking crime, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i).

(Dkt. No. 9).


                                2
         On October 11, 2011, Smalls’ counsel filed a motion to

suppress all evidence and statements obtained during Smalls’ April

26, 2011 arrest. (Dkt. No. 14). Following a hearing on November 8,

2011, Smalls’ motion was denied. Text Order 11/08/2011.

     On November 14, 2011, the government filed (1) a “Notice of

Armed Career Criminal” listing five separate convictions, each of

which qualified as a serious drug offense under 18 U.S.C. §

924(e)(2)(A) (Dkt. No. 18), and (2) an “Information Charging Prior

Conviction” (Dkt. No. 19), listing the same felony drug offenses.1

     Smalls was tried before a jury on December 7, 2011. On the

next day, following closing arguments and the Court’s instructions

to the jury, Smalls was found guilty on all four counts of the

indictment. Minute Entry 12/08/2011. Sentencing was scheduled for

March 2, 2012.   Smalls subsequently sought to continue sentencing

to assess whether his prior convictions qualified him as an armed

career criminal. (Dkt. No. 35). Sentencing was moved a second time

upon the government’s motion in order to obtain certified copies of

Smalls’ convictions in the State of New York. (Dkt. No. 37).

     On April 23, 2012, the government filed a motion to dismiss

the information charging prior convictions on the ground that

Smalls no longer qualified for sentencing as an armed career

criminal. The government noted that Smalls was able to amend one of

     1

     Two of those convictions occurred in Rhode Island state court
in 2004 and 2006, respectively. The other three convictions all
occurred on the same day in 1990 in the Bronx County Supreme Court.

                                 3
his more recent Rhode Island drug trafficking convictions to a

simple possession and that one of Smalls’ older New York state

convictions was entered as a possession offense in the certified

records. However, the government also sought an upward departure

because Smalls’ criminal history category was now substantially

underrepresented. (Dkt. No. 43). On his part, Smalls sought a

three-level reduction for acceptance of responsibility or, in the

alternative, a downward variance in accordance with § 3553(a)

factors. (Dkt. No. 42).

     On May 30, 2012, Smalls was sentenced to a sentence of 72

months’   incarceration   for   Counts   I   through   III,   to   run

concurrently, and 60 months’ incarceration for Count IV, to run

consecutively, as mandated by 18 U.S.C. § 924(c).

     Smalls appealed   his conviction and sentence on June 4, 2012.

(Dkt. No. 47). On June 13, 2013, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the

First Circuit affirmed both, rejecting (1) Smalls’ challenge of the

suppression ruling by this Court; (2) Smalls’ claim that his

conviction for Count IV was not supported by sufficient evidence;

and (3) Smalls’ claim of ineffective assistance of counsel for

failing to discuss the sufficiency claim as part of a Fed. R. Crim.

P. Rule 29 motion. With regard to the last ground, the appellate

court noted that “no matter the standard of review applied, Smalls

cannot demonstrate any prejudice flowing from counsel’s failure to

pursue the matter.” (Dkt. No. 64).


                                 4
     Smalls filed a timely motion to vacate, set aside, or correct

his sentence pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255. (Dkt. No. 66). The

government responded with an objection to Smalls’ motion (Dkt. No.

68), to which Smalls filed a further reply, (Dkt. No. 70).

     II. Standard of Review

     Pursuant to Section 2255, “[a] prisoner in custody under

sentence of a court established by Act of Congress claiming the

right to be released upon the ground that the sentence was imposed

in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States, or

that the court was without jurisdiction to impose such sentence, or

that the sentence was in excess of the maximum authorized by law,

or is otherwise subject to collateral attack, may move the court

which imposed the sentence to vacate, set aside or correct the

sentence.” 28 U.S.C. § 2255(a).

     Relief under Section 2255 is available only if the Court finds

a lack of jurisdiction, constitutional error, or a fundamental

error of law.   See United States v. Addonizio, 442 U.S. 178, 184-

84, 99 S.Ct. 2235, 60 L.Ed.2d 805     (1979) (holding that “an error

of law does not provide a basis for a collateral attack unless the

claimed error constituted ‘a fundamental defect which inherently

results in a complete miscarriage of justice.’”)(quoting Hill v.

United States, 368 U.S. 424, 428, 82 S.Ct. 468, 471, 7 L.Ed.2d 417

(1962)). A fundamental error of law is a defect “‘which inherently

results in a complete miscarriage of justice’ or ‘an omission


                                  5
inconsistent with the rudimentary demands of fair procedure.’”

Knight v. United States, 37 F.3d 769, 772 (1st Cir.1994) (quoting

Hill v. United States, 368 U.S. at 428, 82 S.Ct. at 471)).

     A prisoner seeking relief under § 2255 is procedurally barred

from raising issues not presented on direct appeal unless he

demonstrates “cause and prejudice ... or, alternatively, that he is

actually innocent.” Hughes v. United States, 241 F.Supp.2d 148, 152

(D.R.I.2003)   (internal   quotation   marks   and   citation omitted).

Generally, claims of sentencing errors are not cognizable in a §

2255 proceeding absent “exceptional circumstances;” however, a

petition does not face the same hurdle for claims of ineffective

assistance of counsel regarding sentencing. Knight, 37 F.3d at

773–74.

     Under the Sixth Amendment, each defendant is guaranteed the

right to effective assistance of counsel. To prevail on a claim of

ineffective assistance of counsel, a petitioner must show: that (1)

counsel's performance was deficient, i.e. “counsel's representation

fell below an objective standard of reasonableness;” and (2) the

deficient performance prejudiced the defense, i.e. “a reasonable

probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the

result of the proceeding would have been different.” Strickland v.

Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 688, 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674

(1984). “A failure to show prejudice will suffice to defeat a

particular claim, without reference to the level of counsel's


                                  6
performance.”    Nguyen   v.    United    States,   230   F.Supp.2d   94,   96

(D.Me.2002).

III. Discussion

     A. The Indictment

     Smalls was charged with possession with intent to distribute

“a mixture and substance containing a detectable amount” of heroin

(Count I) and cocaine base (Count II).2 Both counts were charged

under 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(C), the latter of which

sets forth a maximum sentence of not more than twenty years’

imprisonment, but sets no minimum prison terms for the respective

offenses.   21   U.S.C.   §    841(b)(1)(C).   Because     Smalls   had   been

previously convicted for a felony drug offense, the possible

maximum prison term was raised to thirty years. Id. The jury

convicted Smalls for both drug offenses (as well as the firearms

related counts) and Smalls received a sentence in accordance with

U.S.S.G. sentencing guidelines that fell well below the statutory

maximum. No statutory minimum sentence was indicated for either

Counts I or II and none was applied. Under those circumstances,

Smalls’ contention that the amount of drugs had to be determined by

a jury is unsupportable. The amounts of the drugs found in Smalls’

possession did not constitute an element of the offenses charged in



     2

     As the government points out, the search of Smalls’ residence
also revealed cocaine salts as well as Xanax and Suboxone pills,
for which Smalls was not charged.

                                      7
the indictment; they were merely factors considered by the Court in

sentencing.

      B. Ineffective Assistance by Trial Counsel

      Smalls contends that his trial counsel was ineffective for two

reasons: (1) counsel failed to make a particular argument when

attempting to suppress evidence of the firearms founds in Smalls’

apartment; and (2) he gave erroneous advice to Smalls regarding the

Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA).

      No lengthy discussion is required for the second of those

arguments. At the time the government filed the “Armed Career

Criminal Notice” (Dkt. No. 18), Smalls’ criminal history reflected

convictions for two prior serious drug offenses in Rhode Island,

and   convictions     for    three   such   offenses   in   New   York   State.

Accordingly, the advice Smalls’ counsel allegedly gave to his

client regarding the impact of those convictions under the ACCA

would   have   been    accurate.     Subsequently,     Smalls’    counsel     was

successful in amending one of Smalls’ Rhode Island drug trafficking

convictions to simple possession. Because one of Smalls’ New York

convictions    had    been   entered   as   a   possession offense       in   the

certified records, Smalls no longer qualified as an armed career

criminal and the government moved to dismiss the information

charging prior convictions. In other words, efforts by Smalls’

counsel on behalf of his client resulted in a significant reduction

of the sentence Smalls would have received under the ACCA.


                                       8
     Secondly,      Smalls   contends    that    his   counsel     provided

ineffective assistance because evidence of firearms located during

the search of Smalls’ residence was not suppressed.

     The   record   of   Smalls’   prosecution   reflects   that   Smalls’

counsel filed two separate motions to suppress: (1) a motion to

suppress statements and search, including “any and all fruits of

said arrest and search” for lack of probable cause (Dkt. No. 14);

and (2) a second motion to suppress “all evidence” on the ground

that Smalls’ consent to the search was not freely and voluntarily

given (Dkt. No. 25). The Court conducted two separate hearings on

Smalls’ motions, both of which were denied. Hearing Transcript from

November 8, 2011 (Dkt. No. 57) and Hearing Transcript from December

6, 2011 (Dkt. No. 62).

     Smalls now suggests, for the first time, that the consent he

gave for the search of his residence did not extend to the firearms

that were located in the course of the search. The “Consent to

Search”    form (Dkt. No. 27, Page 11 of 11) signed by Smalls and

upheld by this Court after Smalls’ challenge thereof, explicitly

authorized the detectives to “conduct a complete search of my

premises and/or vehicle described as [Smalls’ Address]” and gave

them permission “to take any letters, papers, or other property

from my premises and/or vehicle.” Based on the testimony provided

by Smalls and the two detectives at the hearing on Smalls’ second

motion to suppress all evidence, including the firearms, the Court


                                     9
determined that the consent to search his residence was “freely and

voluntarily provided on the part of the Defendant.” TR 12/06/11 at

73:14-17. In his testimony, Smalls agreed that he was cooperative

and helpful in the search and that he did not tell the detectives

anything about the guns because they never asked him about the

guns. Id. at 63:16-20. Nowhere did Smalls assert that his consent

was intended to be limited or that he attempted to withdraw his

consent in the course of the search.

     Under those circumstances, the Court finds that Smalls has

failed    to   establish    “a   reasonable      probability   that,      but   for

counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would

have been different,” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. at

2068, or that his claim of an unreasonable search and seizure with

respect to the firearms has any merit. Moreover, the trial record

supports that Smalls had the benefit of excellent assistance of

counsel who saw him through two suppression hearings, a jury trial,

and the sentencing phase, during which counsel was able to help

Smalls avoid a 15-year minimum sentence under the ACCA.

     C. Ineffective Assistance by Appellate Counsel

     Finally,      Smalls    contends     that    he   received     ineffective

assistance of counsel from his appellate counsel. Specifically,

Smalls asserts that he requested that his appellate counsel pursue

Smalls’    newly   conceived     suppression      challenge    of   the    seized

firearms and that counsel informed him that the issue could not be


                                        10
raised before the Appellate Court because the trial court did not

have an opportunity to review it. The Judgment of the First Circuit

Court of Appeals reveals that Smalls’ appellate counsel raised

three separate issues on appeal: (1) this Court’s determination

that   Smalls     had   voluntarily    consented    to     the   search    of   his

residence; (2) that Smalls’ conviction for possessing a firearm in

furtherance of a drug trafficking crime was not supported by

sufficient      evidence;     and   (3)     that   trial     counsel      provided

ineffective assistance by failing to raise a Fed. R. Crim. P. Rule

29 motion at the conclusion of the government’s case. The Appellate

Court rejected all three of Smalls’ grounds for his appeal. (Dkt.

No. 64).

       “The rule in this circuit is that a fact-specific claim of

ineffective legal assistance cannot be raised initially on direct

review of a criminal conviction, but must originally be presented

to the district court.” United States v. Grace, 367 F.3d 29, 37

(1st Cir.2004) (internal quotation marks omitted). However, the

appellate court will deviate from this rule “where the critical

facts are not genuinely in dispute and the record is sufficiently

developed    to    allow    reasoned   consideration       of    an   ineffective

assistance claim.” United States v. Natanel, 938 F.2d 302, 309 (1st

Cir.1991). Smalls’ claim does not fit into that category; on the

contrary, the record reveals that Smalls consented to a search of

his entire residence and that he never raised the issue of having


                                       11
limited his consent in any way. Accordingly, Smalls’ appellate

counsel could not have raised this issue during his direct appeal

and Smalls suffered no prejudice as a result.

IV.   Conclusion

      For all of the foregoing reasons, Smalls’ motion to vacate,

set aside, or correct his sentence is DENIED and DISMISSED.

                 Ruling on Certificate of Appealability

      Pursuant    to   Rule   11(a)   of   the   Rules   Governing   §   2255

Proceedings for the United States District Courts, this Court

hereby finds that this case is not appropriate for the issuance of

a certificate of appealability because Smalls has failed to make “a

substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional right” as to

any claim, as required by 28 U.S.C. § 2253(c)(2).

      Smalls is advised that any motion to reconsider this ruling

will not extend the time to file a notice of appeal in this matter.

See Rules Governing § 2255 Cases, Rule 11(a).



SO ORDERED.

/s/ Mary M. Lisi

Mary M. Lisi
United States District Judge

December 11, 2014




                                      12
