                      United States District Court

                       District of Massachusetts


                                     )
United States of America,            )
                                     )
             v.                      )
                                     )    Criminal Action No.
Dan Smith,                           )    07-10143-NMG
                                     )
             Defendant.              )

---------------)


                           MEMORANDUM AND ORDER

GORTON, J.

     In March, 2009, this Court sentenced Dan Smith

("defendant") to 60 months in prison and four years of

supervised release.       The sentence was imposed pursuant to a Fed.

R. Crim. P. 11 (c) (1) (c) binding plea agreement and the crimes to

which defendant pled were Conspiracy to Possess with Intent to

Distribute Cocaine and Cocaine Base, Possession with Intent to

Distribute Cocaine Base and Possession of Ammunition as a

convicted felon.

     The drugs that were seized from defendant were analyzed by

laboratory chemist Annie Dookhan ("Dookhan"), who later pled

guilty to multiple instances of tampering with evidence, which

included adding known controlled substances to samples thereby

resulting in positive tests.       Defendant now contends that he

would not have pled guilty had he been aware of the misconduct

that took place at the Massachusetts Department of Public

                                    -1­
Health's William A.        Hinton State Laboratory ("Hinton Lab") and

moves to withdraw his plea and vacate his conviction, pursuant

to 28 U.S.C.   §   2255.     For the reasons that follow, defendant's

motion will be denied.

I.   Background

     In or about December, 2006, a cooperating witness,          ("the

CW") informed law enforcement officers of defendant's drug

operation, located at 227 Washington Street, Taunton,

Massachusetts ("the residence") and admitted to purchasing crack

cocaine from defendant on at least two previous occasions.

Based on that information, officers set up surveillance outside

the residence where they observed heavy foot traffic consistent

with a busy drug establishment.        Officers also obtained

telephone records, which revealed a high volume of calls between

defendant and co-conspirators "proving drug dealing."           They

arranged for the CW to carry out a controlled purchase from

defendant. Officers provided the CW with $40 buy money and

directed him/her to contact defendant.        Officers watched as the

CW entered the residence and emerge a few minutes later.           After

the purchase was complete, the CW handed officers a substance

that field tested positive for cocaine.

     On December 28, 2006, officers executed a warrant to search

the residence.      Upon entering, they encountered defendant

sitting on the living room couch and a woman, later identified

                                     -2­
as Jillian Richards    ("Ms. Richards"),   standing in the kitchen.

As the officers approached, Ms. Richards attempted to conceal a

suspicious substance from officers by throwing it allover the

kitchen.    Officer retrieved the substance from the various

kitchen surfaces and then searched the rest of the residence.

      A full search of the apartment uncovered:     (1) a black bag

wi th a firearm holster,   (2) two bot t Le s of a cutting agent,   (3)

paperwork from Morton Hospital under the name of Dan Smith,         (4)

50 Remington rounds of ammunition,      (5) cocaine on the stove and

in the oven,   (6) crack cocaine on the kitchen table and floor,

(7) a pill bottle with 13 rounds of ammunition,      (8) a cellular

phone,   (9) a prescription under the name of Dan Smith and (10) a

small digital scale.    Officers eventually sent the drugs to the

Hinton lab where chemists Annie Dookhan and Peter Piro confirmed

their identity as cocaine.    The official drug certificates

identify Dookhan as the primary analyst.

      After the search, Ms. Richards provided a statement wherein

she confirmed that defendant was cooking crack cocaine in the

kitchen and described defendant's drug dealing operation as a

thriving business that served at least 50 customers each day.

Ms.   Richards admitted to her involvement in the operation and

pled guilty in Bristol County Superior Court, where she received

a sentence of two years to two years and one day.




                                  -3­
         In October, 2008, a Second Superseding Indictment charged

defendant with Conspiracy to Possess with Intent to Distribute

Cocaine in violation of 21 U.S.C.            §   846,    Possession with Intent

to Distribute Cocaine Base in violation of 21 U.S.C.                 §   841(a) (1)

and Felon in Possession of Ammunition in violation of 18 U.S.C.

§     922 (g) (1).   Shortly thereafter, the government and defendant

executed a binding plea agreement, pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P.

11 (c) (1) (c), whereby defendant agreed to plead guilty to all

three counts in exchange for a sentence of incarceration for a

period of 60 months and four years of supervised release.

Absent the plea agreement, defendant would have faced a

sentencing guideline range of 95-115 months.                  He raised no

question concerning the chemical composition of the drugs nor

did he request additional testing.

         Defendant served his term of incarceration and then, in

March, 2013, approximately 22 months into his term of supervised

release, defendant filed the instant motion to withdraw his

guilty plea and vacate his conviction.                  Defendant argues that

his plea was involuntary insofar as he would not have pled

guilty had he known about Dookhan's misconduct.

II.      Analysis

         A.    Legal Standard

         Title 28 U.S.C.   §   2255 enables a prisoner in custody to

move the court that imposed his sentence to vacate, set aside or

                                       -4­
correct the sentence if it was      (1)   imposed in violation of the

Constitution or laws of the United States or by a court that

lacked jurisdiction,   (2)   in excess of the maximum authorized by

law or (3) otherwise subject to collateral attack. 28 U.S.C.             §

2255(a); David v. U.S., 134 F.3d 470,474         (1st Cir. 1998).    The

defendant bears the burden of establishing the need for relief

in each of those circumstances. rd.

     As a general rule, a voluntary and intelligent plea, made

with the advice of competent counsel, may not be collaterally

attacked. See Mabry v. Johnson,      467 U.S. 504,   508   (1984); see

also Moreno-Morales v. U.S.,      334 F.3d 140, 145 (1st Cir. 1998)

("Evidentiary hearings on    §   2255 petitions are the exception,

not the norm, and there is a heavy burden on the petitioner to

demonstrate that a evidentiary hearing is warranted.").

However, if a prisoner's claim is predicated on evidence

unavailable to him at the time of the plea, he can collaterally

attack his sentence on the ground that his plea was involuntary

(i.e., unknowing, unintelligent and insufficiently aware).

Ferrara v.   ~'   456 F.3d 278, 289 (1st Cir. 2006).         A defendant

must prove two elements in order to vacate a guilty plea as

involuntary:

     First,   he    must   show    that   some    egregiously
     impermissible    conduct    (say,   threats,     blatant
     misrepresentations,   or   untoward   blandishments   by
     government agents) antedated the entry of his plea.
     Second, he must show that the misconduct influenced

                                    -5­
     his decision to plead guilty or,        put another way,    that
     it was material to that choice.

rd. at 290    (internal citations omitted)      The reviewing court

must consider the "totality of the circumstances surrounding the

plea." rd.     Relevant factors include whether the undisclosed

information (1)    would have undermined the facts which formed the

basis of the guilty plea,    (2)   could have discredited or

impeached a witness whose credibility may have determined the

outcome at trial,    (3) merely adds to evidence already in

defendant's possession,    (4) would have affected defense

counsel's decision to recommend pleading guilty and (5) was

eclipsed by the benefits of pleading guilty.        rd. at 294

(internal citations omitted)

     B.      Application

     Defendant contends that his plea was involuntary.           He

maintains that had he known that his counsel would have been

able to impeach the credibility of the government's drug analyst

and cast doubt upon the chemical composition of the drugs, he

would not have pled guilty to any of the charges or, at the very

least, he might have negotiated a more favorable plea bargain.

Defendant acknowledges that Dookhan's misconduct had no affect

on the ammunition recovered from the residence but insists that

he only pled guilty to that charge as part of the overall plea

agreement.


                                    -6­
           1.   Materiality

     The Court begins its analysis with the second inquiry under

the Ferrara framework.    To satisfy the materiality prong,

defendant "must show a reasonable probability that, but for the

misconduct, he would not have pled guilty ... " Hill v. Lockhart,

474 u.s. 52, 59 (1985).    A reasonable probability is a

probability "sufficient to undermine confidence in a belief"

that defendant would have pled guilty. Ferrara,    456 F.3d at 294.

Defendant's "subjective, post hoc assertions" are not

dispositive.    ~   v. Merritt, 755 F.3d 6, 10   (1st Cir. 2014).

Rather, a court must employ an objective analysis to determine

what effect, if any,   "Dookhan's misconduct was likely to have

had on [defendant's] chances at trial." Merritt, 755 F.3d at 10;

see also Wilkins v. U.S., 754 F.3d 24, 28   (1st Cir. 2014).

     The Wilkins and Merritt decisions provide instructive

guidance on this analysis.    The defendants in those cases, Larry

Wilkins   ("Wilkins") and Ronald Merritt ("Merritt")   (jointly

"appellants"), received lengthy prison sentences after they pled

guilty to Possession with the Intent to Distribute crack

cocaine. Id. at 26.    The charges were brought after appellants

sold crack cocaine to an undercover Boston Police Officer.        The

officer gave Merritt $40 and then watched him walk across the

street toward Wilkins.    Wilkins handed something to Merritt, who

then walked back across the street and gave the officer a

                                 -7­
plastic bag containing what appeared to be crack cocaine.

Officers then arrested and searched appellants incident to the

arrest.   From Wilkins, officers seized the $40 used to

facilitate the undercover purchase, as well as 36 bags of what

appeared to be crack cocaine.     Officers field-tested one of the

bags and confirmed that it contained crack cocaine.     All of the

bags were then forwarded to the Hinton lab where Dookhan

certified that the bags contained crack cocaine. rd. at 26-7.

     Shortly thereafter, appellants moved to withdraw their

pleas based on the Dookhan's misconduct, prompting the

government to commission a retest of 13 untested bags seized

incident to appellants' arrest.     While all 13 bags tested

positive for cocaine, appellants continued to maintain that they

would not have pled guilty had they known about Dookhan's

unlawful activity. rd. at 27.     Appellants' counsel also

contended that they would not have advised their clients to

plead guilty had they known the magnitude of Dookhan's

misconduct.   rd.

     The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit denied the

motion to withdraw based on appellants'    failure to demonstrate

materiality. rd. at 28; Merritt, 755 F.3d at 10.     The Court

concluded that the government's evidence would have been

sufficient to prove appellants' guilt, with or without Dookhan's

drug certifications.   The "prototypical street corner drug buy,"

                                  -8­
positive field test and stockpile of suspicious bags seized from

Wilkins constituted "overwhelming" circumstantial evidence of

appellants' guilt. Wilkins, 754 F.3d at 29; see also Merritt,

755 F.3d at 10.     Furthermore, appellants admitted that the

contraband seized incident to their arrests was, in fact,       crack

cocaine and neither attempted to discredit the admission or make

a claim of factual innocence. Id. at 11; Wilkins, 754 F.3d at 30

(noting that an admission "is entitled to significant (albeit

not dispositive) weight when ... [the offender] seeks to vacate

[his] plea through a collateral attack.").       The Court concluded

that, given the results of the second drug test, any attempt to

argue that the substance was not what it was purported to be

would fail and the Dookhan scandal by itself did not provide

appellants a defense.

     There are two noteworthy differences between the facts in

Wilkins and Merritt and those in the instant case.        First, in

this case, the government did not commission a retesting of the

substances seized from the residence.       Nevertheless, the

government contends and defendant acknowledges that courts often

refuse to reverse convictions where drug composition was proven

by circumstantial evidence. See e.g.,      ~    v. Valencia-Lucena,

925 F.2d 506, 512    (1st Cir. 1991)    (finding it unnecessary to

perform chemical analysis where circumstantial evidence of drug

identity was sufficient); U.S. v. Walters,      904 F.2d 765, 771

                                  -9­
(holding that the testimony with respect to defendant's

acquaintance was sufficient to establish drug identity).     In

this case, the probative circumstantial evidence is derived from

a field test conducted immediately after the search of the

residence, observations made by an experienced narcotics

investigator who concluded that the substance was indeed crack

cocaine and the general unlikelihood that defendant would

jeopardize his personal safety and business by selling

counterfeit drugs.

     Second, the evidence in this case did not include an

undercover purchase and therefore the government's case could

not be bolstered by the direct observation of a law enforcement

officer.   Instead, the government would have likely offered the

testimony of Ms. Richards to substantiate the charge that

defendant operated a sizable drug operation.   Defendant contends

that her credibility as a witness would have been subject to

vigorous cross-examination based on her receipt of a favorable

state court plea agreement and immunity from federal

prosecution.   While such revelations might have been harmful to

the government's case, they do not rise to the level of outcome

determinativeness contemplated by Ferrara when considered

alongside the panoply of untainted circumstantial evidence

against defendant.




                               -10­
     Aside from the two distinctions discussed above, the facts

in this case are nearly identical to those in Wilkins and

Merritt.    Similar to the defendants in Wilkins and Merritt,

Smith offers no direct evidence showing that Dookhan's

misconduct marred the contraband seized from the residence, nor

does he make a claim of actual innocence.         Defendant also

admitted under oath at his change of plea hearing that the drug

seized was crack cocaine.     Moreover, the overwhelming

circumstantial evidence gave defendant "strong incentives" to

plead guilty. See    ~    v. Wilkins,   943 F.   Supp. 2d 248, 251 (D.

Mass., 2013).     That evidence included (1)     telephone records and

visual observations made by investigating officers that denoted

the presence of a high volume drug operation taking place at 227

Washington Street,    (2) a controlled purchase of crack cocaine,

(3) defendant's physical presence at 227 Washington Street

during the search that yielded drugs and other paraphernalia,

(4) the positive field test for cocaine and (5) the statement

made by Ms.   Richards detailing defendant's extensive drug

activity.

     Finally, the Court agrees with the government that the need

to prove the identity of the substances seized from defendant is

reduced because one of the three charges to which defendant pled

guilty was conspiracy to possess cocaine base with intent to

distribute.     The government need only prove that there was an

                                 -11­
agreement to procure and distribute drugs to prove the

conspiracy. See United States v. Cotal-Crespo, 47 F.3d 1, 6 (1st

Cir. 1995).   Here, the presence of the defendant during the drug

raid which netted cocaine base, the seizure of items used to

weigh, package and sell cocaine, telephone records suggesting

high volume drug sales and the testimony of Ms.   Richards that

she was involved in drug trafficking offer ample evidence

supporting the defendant's conviction on the drug conspiracy

count.

     Based on the solid evidence against defendant, the Court

concludes that the recently discovered evidence objectively

would not have changed the outcome of a trial because it is not

reasonably probable that Dookhan's misconduct influenced

defendant's decision to plead guilty.   The weight of the

evidence, along with the alluring benefit of a substantially

reduced sentence, provided defendant with more than enough

motivation to plead guilty, regardless of drug certificates.

Accordingly, defendant fails to show materiality and is not

entitled to relief.




                               -12­
· .



                                      ORDER

            For the foregoing reasons, defendant's motion to withdraw

       his guilty plea and vacate his conviction under 28 U.S.C.   §   2255

       (Docket No.   111) is DENIED and his petition for habeas corpus is

       DISMISSED.


       So ordered.

                                          Nathaniel M. Gorton
                                          United States District Judge

       Dated December   /S,   2014




                                       -13­
