Case 1:11-cr-10382-DPW Document 69 Flled 08/17/16 Page 1 of 4

AO 245[) {Rev. 09/'1 l) Judginent in a Crimiiial Casi: for Revocations

 

 

 

Shcct l
UNiTED STATES DisTRiCT COURT
Disti'ict of Massachusetts
UNITED STATES OF AMERlCA Judgmerit in a Criminal Case
V. (For Revocation ofProbation or Supervised Release)
..lAi‘\/lES BODDlE
Case No. 110r10382-DF’W
USM No. 94195-038
Stylianus Sinnis

THE DEFENDANT: Defendant s Attoriiey
|§/ admitted guilt to violation of condition(s) |A1510105 iii |H~V ofthe tenn of supervision
l:l was found in violation of condition(s) after denial of guilt.

The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these violations:

Violation Number Nature of Vioiation Violation Ended
l A,B,C,D Did not answer all inquiries and follow instructions of PO. 08110/2016
ll Associated with persons engaged in criminal activity. 06/06/2016
ll| Falled to participate in a substance abuse program 08/03/2016
V Use of a controlled substance 08/04/2016
'l`he defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 4 of this judgment -The sentence is imposed pursuant to

the Sentencing Reforin Act of 1984.

|:| The defendant has not violated condition(s) |V and is discharged as to such violation(s) condition.

It is ordered that the defendant must notify the United St_ate_s attorney for this district within 30_ days of any . _
change of naine, residence, or mailing address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are
fully paid. If ordered to pay restitution, the defendant must notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in
economic circumstances

 

 

Last Four Digits of Defendant’s Soc. Sec. No.: 3499 08/17/3'016
Da f sition i`.ludgment
D-:-feiidant’s Yeai‘ of Birth: 1936 /U ,
_ M///rl - ADL cab
City and State of Defendant’s Residence: Signature of Judge

Broc|<ton, lW-\

 

Douglas P. Woodlock U.S. District Judge

 

Name and Title ofludge

08/17/20‘16

 

Datc

Case 1:11-cr-10382-DPW Document 69 Flled 08/17/16 Page 2 of 4

AO 24$D (Rev. 09/11) Judgmcnt in a Cn`mina| Case for Revocations
Sheet 2- lmprisonment

 

 

Judgment - Page 2 of
,_D.EEENDANTZ JA|V|ES BODDIE
CASE NUN[BER: 11Cr10382-DPW

IMPRISONMENT

The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a total
term of :

thirty (30 ) days

lIl The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:

d The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.

lIl The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district:
.. ».»~ |:| at |Il a.m. lIl p.m. on
l:l as notified by the United States Marshal.

 

 

lIl The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons:

El before 2 p.m. on

 

l:l as notified by the United States Marshal.
lIl as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.

 

 

 

RETURN
I have executed thisjudgment as follows:
Defendant delivered on to
at with a certified copy of this judgment
UNITED STATES MARSHAL
By

 

DEPUTY UNITED STATES MARSHAL

Case 1:11-cr-10382-DPW Document 69 Flled 08/17/16 Page 3 of 4

AO 245D (Rev. 09/11).ludgment in a Criminal Case for Revocations
Sheet 3 _ Supervised Release

 

Judgment-Page 3 of 4

 

DEFENDANT: JAM ES BODD|E
CASE NUMBER: 1 1cr10382~DPW
SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of :
up and until May 26, 2019.

The defendant must report t_o the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release
from the custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state or local crime.

The defendant shall not unlawfull possess a controlled substance The defendant shall refrain from any unlawful use of a controlled
substance The defendant shall su mit to one drug test within 15 days of release from imprisonment and at least two periodic drug
tests thereafter as determined by the court.

l:l The above drug testing condition is suspended, based on the court’s determination that the defendant poses a low risk of
future substance abuse. (Check, if applicable.)

The defendant shall not possess a firearm, ammunition, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon. (Check, if
The defendant shall cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

sss

The defendant shall register with the state sex offender registration agency in the state where the defendant resides, works,
or is a student, as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

El The defendant shall participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (Check, if applicable.)

_ If this judgment imposes a fine 01_‘ restitution, it is be a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay in accordance
with the Schedule of Payments sheet of this judgment

_ _ The defendant must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court as well as with any additional
conditions on the attached page.

STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

I) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district without the permission of the court or probation officer;

2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer in a manner and frequency directed by the court or probation officer;

3) t)hf%;i§£endant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the instructions of the probation

4) the defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities;

5) the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation, unless excused by the probation officer for schooling, training,
or other acceptable reasons;

6) the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employment;

7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not purchase, possess, use, distribute, or administer any
controlled substance or any paraphernalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician;

8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed, or administered;

9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activi and shall not associate with any person

convicted of a felony, unless granted permission to do so by the probation o icer;

10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit him or her at a_ny time at home or elsewhere and shall permit
confiscation of any contraband observed in plain view of the probation officer;

ll) the defendant shall notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law
enforcement officer;

12) the defendant sha_ll not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency
without the permission of the court; an

13) as directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notify,third arties of risks that may _be occasioned lime
defendant’s criminal record or personal history or characteristics an s_hall permit the probation officer to m e such
notifications and to confirm the defendant’s compliance with such notification requirement

Case 1:11-cr-10382-DPW Document 69 Flled 08/17/16 Page 4 of 4

AO 245D (Rev. 09/| l) Judgrnent in a Criminal Case for Revocations
Sheet 3A - Supervised Release

Judgment-Page 4 of 4
DEFENDANT: JAM ES BODD|E
CASE NUMBER: 11cr’10382-DPW

ADDITIONAL SUPERVISED RELEASE TERMS

14) Upon the release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be placed in a residential confinement/treatment center for a
period of three (3) months, as directed by the Probation Ofnce.

15) The defendant shall participate in a program for substance abuse counseling as directed by the United States
Probation Oflice, which program may include testingl not to exceed 104 drug tests per year, to determine whether the
defendant has reverted to the use of alcohol or drugs. The defendant shall be required to contribute to the costs of
services for such treatment based on the ability to payor availability of third party payment

'iS) The defendant shall not to consume any alcoholic beverages

17) The defendant shall participate in an educational services program and further educational and/or vocational training,
as directed by the Probation Offrce. Such program may include GED preparation and/or other classes designed to
improve the defendant's proficiency in skills such as reading, writing, mathematics, and computer use, The defendant shall
be required to contribute to the costs of such programming based on the ability to payor availability of third-party payment.

18) The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant consider participating in the District of Massachusetts'
CARE or Re-Start program, if he is deemed an appropriate candidate.

19) The defendant shall stay out of Brockton, MA while on supervised release, except on holidays or other special
occasions when he may be expressly permitted by his Probation Ofi”icer.

