            Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 1 of 8




                                                      U.S. Department of Justice

                                                      Nathaniel R. Mendell
                                                      Acting United States Attorney
                                                      District of Massachusetts


Main Reception: (617) 748-3100                        John Joseph Moakley United States Courthouse
                                                      1 Courthouse Way
                                                      Suite 9200
                                                      Boston, Massachusetts 02210

                                                      August 27, 2021
Aviva Jeruchim, Esq.
Jeruchim & Davenport, LLP
50 Congress Street, Suite 615
Boston, MA 02109

       Re:      United States v. Nicole Benton
                M.J. No. 21-mj-01436-DLC
                Crim. No. _________________

Dear Attorney Jeruchim:

        The United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts (“the U.S. Attorney”) and your
client, Nicole Benton (“Defendant”), agree as follows, pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 11(c)(1)(B):

       1.       Change of Plea

        Defendant will waive Indictment and plead guilty to an Information charging the
following: Count One, Conspiracy to Manufacture, Distribute, and to Possess with Intent to
Distribute 40 grams or more of a mixture and substance containing a detectable amount of fentanyl,
and other controlled substances, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846; Count Two, Possession of a
Firearm in Furtherance of a Drug Trafficking Crime, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A).
Defendant admits that she committed the crimes specified in Count One and Count Two and is in
fact guilty of them.

       2.       Penalties

       Defendant faces the following mandatory minimum and maximum penalties:

        For Count One, alleging a violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846, a mandatory sentence of 5 years
and up to 40 years of incarceration, a term of supervised release of at least 4 years and up to life,
a fine of up to $5,000,000, a mandatory special assessment of $100, and forfeiture to the extent
charged in the Information.

       For Count Two, alleging a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i), a mandatory sentence

                                                 1
            Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 2 of 8




of 5 years and up to life of incarceration, the sentence for this count is to be served from and after
the term of imprisonment imposed for Count One, a term of supervised release of up to 5 years, a
fine of up to $250,000, a $100 special assessment, and forfeiture to the extent alleged in the
Information.

       Defendant understands that, if she is not a United States citizen by birth, pleading guilty
may affect Defendant’s immigration status. Defendant agrees to plead guilty regardless of any
potential immigration consequences, even if Defendant’s plea results in being automatically
removed from the United States.

       3.       Sentencing Guidelines

        The Parties agree that the Defendant’s total offense level is 26. The Parties agree that the
offense level under the United States Sentencing Guidelines (the “Guidelines”) should be
calculated as follows:

       (a)      Offense Level, Count One:

                1. Defendant’s base offense level is 34, because Defendant is responsible for at
                   least 4 kilograms but less than 12 kilograms of Fentanyl (USSG § 2D1.1(c)(3));

                2. Defendant’s offense level is decreased by 3 levels, because the Defendant
                   received an adjustment under §3B1.2 (Mitigating Role); and (B) the base
                   offense level under subsection (c) is level 34 or level 36 (USSG §
                   2D1.1(a)(5)(ii)); and

                3. Defendant’s offense level is decreased by 2 because the Defendant was a minor
                   participant in the criminal activity (USSG § 3B1.2(b)).

                4. The Offense Level1 for Count One is 29.

       (b)      Offense Level, Count Two:

                1. The guidelines sentence for a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) is the minimum
                   term of imprisonment required by statute (USSG § 2K2.4(b)); and




1
  The Defendant’s offense level is not increased by 2 for possession of a dangerous weapon
(including a firearm) (USSG § 2D1.1(b)(1)), because the Defendant is charged in Count Two with
a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) relating to Count One. See USSG 2K2.4, cmt. 4 (“If a sentence
under this guideline is imposed in conjunction with a sentence for an underlying offense, do not
apply any specific offense characteristic for possession, brandishing, use, or discharge of an
explosive or firearm when determining the sentence for the underlying offense.”).


                                                  2
            Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 3 of 8




                2. The minimum term of imprisonment required by 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i) is
                   5 years (60 months) from and after the sentence for Count One. See 18 U.S.C.
                   § 924(c)(1)(D)(ii).

       (c)      Grouping

               Count Two is not subject to the grouping rules. See USSG § 2K2.4(b) (“if the
       defendant, whether or not convicted of another crime, was convicted of violating section
       924(c) or section 929(a) of title 18, United States Code, the guideline sentence is the
       minimum term of imprisonment required by statute. Chapters Three and Four shall not
       apply to that count of conviction.”).

                Accordingly, the Defendant’s adjusted offense level is therefore 29.

       (d)      Acceptance of Responsibility

              Based on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the offense
       of conviction in this case, the U.S. Attorney agrees to recommend that the Court reduce
       Defendant's Adjusted Offense Level by 3 levels under USSG § 3E1.1.

       Defendant understands that the Court is not required to follow this calculation or even to
sentence Defendant within the Guidelines and that Defendant may not withdraw her guilty plea if
Defendant disagrees with how the Court calculates the Guidelines or with the sentence the Court
imposes.

         Defendant also understands that the government will object to any reduction in her sentence
based on acceptance of responsibility if: (a) at sentencing, Defendant (herself or through counsel)
indicates that she does not fully accept responsibility for having engaged in the conduct underlying
each of the elements of the crime(s) to which she is pleading guilty; or (b) by the time of
sentencing, Defendant has committed a new federal or state offense, or has in any way obstructed
justice.

       If, after signing this Agreement, Defendant’s criminal history score or Criminal History
Category is reduced, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to seek an upward departure under the
Guidelines.

       Nothing in this Plea Agreement affects the U.S. Attorney’s obligation to provide the Court
and the U.S. Probation Office with accurate and complete information regarding this case.

       4.       Sentence Recommendation

       The U.S. Attorney agrees to recommend the following sentence to the Court:

                a) incarceration within the Guidelines sentencing range as calculated by the Court
                   at sentencing, excluding departures;



                                                 3
Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 4 of 8
            Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 5 of 8




       6.       Forfeiture

        Defendant understands that the Court will, upon acceptance of Defendant’s guilty plea,
enter an order of forfeiture as part of Defendant’s sentence, and that the order of forfeiture may
include assets directly traceable to Defendant’s offense, assets used to facilitate Defendant’s
offense, substitute assets and/or a money judgment equal to the value of the property derived from,
or otherwise involved in, the offense.

       The assets to be forfeited specifically include, without limitation, the following:

                a. Jewelry seized from Defendant on June 30, 2021, including a Necklace with
                   Gold Chain, and a Rolex Watch DJ41, serial number 2603970;

                b. $6,000 in United States currency seized from Defendant on June 30, 2021;

                c. A Ruger .380 Auto firearm, bearing serial number 371395576; and

                d. 8 rounds of ammunition.

        Defendant admits that these assets are subject to forfeiture on the grounds that they
constitute, or are derived from, proceeds of Defendant’s offense, were used to facilitate
Defendant’s offense and/or they were involved in or used in any knowing commission of
Defendant’s offenses. Defendant agrees to consent to the entry of orders of forfeiture for such
property and waives the requirements of Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 11(b)(1)(J), 32.2,
and 43(a) regarding notice of the forfeiture in the charging instrument, advice regarding the
forfeiture at the change-of-plea hearing, announcement of the forfeiture at sentencing, and
incorporation of the forfeiture in the judgment. Defendant understands and agrees that forfeiture
shall not satisfy or affect any fine, lien, penalty, restitution, cost of imprisonment, tax liability or
any other debt owed to the United States.

        Defendant agrees to assist fully in the forfeiture of the foregoing assets. Defendant agrees
to promptly take all steps necessary to pass clear title to the forfeited assets to the United States,
including but not limited to executing any and all documents necessary to transfer such title,
assisting in bringing any assets located outside of the United States within the jurisdiction of the
United States, and taking whatever steps are necessary to ensure that assets subject to forfeiture
are not sold, disbursed, wasted, hidden or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture. Defendant
further agrees (a) not to assist any third party in asserting a claim to the forfeited assets in an
ancillary proceeding, and (b) to testify truthfully in any such proceeding.

        If the U.S. Attorney requests, Defendant shall deliver to the U.S. Attorney within 30 days
after signing this Plea Agreement a sworn financial statement disclosing all assets in which
Defendant currently has any interest and all assets over which Defendant has exercised control, or
has had any legal or beneficial interest. Defendant further agrees to be deposed with respect to
Defendant’s assets at the request of the U.S. Attorney. Defendant agrees that the United States
Department of Probation may share any financial information about the Defendant with the United


                                                   5
            Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 6 of 8




States Attorney’s Office.

        Defendant also agrees to waive all constitutional, legal, and equitable challenges (including
direct appeal, habeas corpus, or any other means) to any forfeiture carried out in accordance with
this Plea Agreement.

        Defendant hereby waives and releases any claims Defendant may have to any vehicles,
currency, or other personal property seized by the United States, or seized by any state or local law
enforcement agency and turned over to the United States, during the investigation and prosecution
of this case, and consents to the forfeiture of all such assets.

       7.       Civil Liability

        This Plea Agreement does not affect any civil liability, including any tax liability,
Defendant has incurred or may later incur due to her criminal conduct and guilty plea to the charges
specified in Paragraph 1 of this Agreement.

       8.       Breach of Plea Agreement

         Defendant understands that if she breaches any provision of this Agreement, violates any
condition of Defendant’s pre-trial release or commits any crime following Defendant’s execution
of this Plea Agreement, Defendant cannot rely upon such conduct to withdraw her guilty plea.
Defendant’s conduct, however, would give the U.S. Attorney the right to be released from her
commitments under this Agreement, to pursue any charges that were, or are to be, dismissed under
this Agreement, and to use against Defendant any of Defendant’s statements, and any information
or materials she provided to the government during investigation or prosecution of her case—even
if the parties had entered any earlier written or oral agreements or understandings about this issue.

        Defendant also understands that if she breaches any provision of this Agreement or engages
in any of the aforementioned conduct, she thereby waives any defenses based on the statute of
limitations, constitutional protections against pre-indictment delay, and the Speedy Trial Act, that
Defendant otherwise may have had to any charges based on conduct occurring before the date of
this Agreement.

       9.       Who is Bound by Plea Agreement

         This Agreement is only between Defendant and the U.S. Attorney for the District of
Massachusetts. It does not bind the Attorney General of the United States or any other federal,
state, or local prosecuting authorities.

       10.      Modifications to Plea Agreement

       This Agreement can be modified or supplemented only in a written memorandum signed
by both parties, or through proceedings in open court.

                                         *        *      *


                                                 6
         Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 7 of 8




        If this letter accurately reflects the agreement between the U.S. Attorney and Defendant,
please have Defendant sign the Acknowledgment of Plea Agreement below. Please also sign
below as Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S. Attorney Philip A. Mallard.


                                                     Sincerely,

                                                     NATHANIEL R. MENDELL
                                                     Acting United States Attorney

                                             By:     /s Timothy E. Moran
                                                     Timothy E. Moran
                                                     Chief, Organized Crime Gang Unit
                                                     Michael Crowley
                                                     Deputy Chief, Organized Crime Gang Unit


                                                     /s Philip A. Mallard
                                                     Philip A. Mallard
                                                     Sarah B. Hoefle
                                                     Assistant U.S. Attorneys




                                                7
Case 1:21-cr-10258-ADB Document 49 Filed 09/30/21 Page 8 of 8




                         ACKNOWLEDGMENTOF PLEAAGREEMENT

        I have read this letter and discussed it with my attorney. The letter accurately presents my
  agreement with the United States Attorney's Ofice for the District of Massachusetts. There are no
  unwritten agreements between me and the United States Attorney's Office, and no United States
  government official has made any unwritten promises or representations to me in connection with
  my guilty plea. I have received no prior offers to resolve this case.

         Iunderstand the crimes I am pleading guilty to, andthe mandatory minimum and maximum
 penalties for those crimes. I bave discussed the Sentencing Guidelines with my lawyer and I
 understand the sentencing ranges that may apply.

        I am satisfied with the legal representation my lawyer has given me and we have had
 enough time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed the charges against me, possible
 defenses I might have, the terns of this Agreement and whether I should go to trial.

         I am entering into this Agreement freely and voluntarily andbecause I am in fact guilty of
 the offenses. I believe this Agreement is in my best interest.




                                                    Nicole Benton
                                                    Defendant

                                                    Date:



        I certify that Nicole Benton has read this Agrecment and that we have discussed what it
means. I believe Nicole Benton understands the Agreement and is entering into it freely,
 voluntarily, and knowingly. I also certify that the U.S. Attormey has not extended any other offers
regarding a change of plea in this case.




                                                 Aviva Jeruchim,Esq.
                                                    Attorney for Defendant

                                             Date:                  3-2|




                                                8
