     Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 1 of 15

                          IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

v.

MANSIO VICENTE-LUCAS,                                       CRIM. NO. 11-132(PG)

Defendant.



                                         OPINION & ORDER

      Pending      disposition      by    this    Court     is   defendant      Mansio   Vicente-
Lucas’ (hereinafter “Vicente-Lucas”) Motion to Suppress. Docket No. 28.
Vicente-Lucas moves to suppress all of the evidence seized as a result of
a warrantless search effectuated on his vehicle by Puerto Rico Police
Department (PRPD) officers on the evening of April 7, 2011. The United
States opposed his request (Docket No. 29). Upon careful review of the
parties’ filings as well as the evidence presented at the suppression
hearing, the Court DENIES Vicente-Lucas’ Motion.


                                   I.      Findings of Fact

      The   Court,       after     having    opportunity         to   examine    the     testimony
proffered    at    the    suppression       hearing    by    PRPD     Officer    Jorge     Dávila-
Barrios,    taking      into   account      the   witness’       demeanor,      credibility     and
appearance, makes the following findings of fact.
      During      the    evening    of    April   7,   2011,     PRPD   Officers       Jorge   Luis
Dávila-Barrios and Juan Alvarado were on patrol along Puerto Rico Highway
No. 52 North, near the exit to the town of Salinas. At approximately 8:30
pm they observed Vicente-Lucas’ vehicle, a dark green Jeep Wrangler,
driving on the left lane of said highway, at what they thought was a
relatively low rate of speed. The Officers clocked his speed at 38 mph
via the use of a radar gun, which would have meant he was violating
section 5.03(a) of the Puerto Rico Vehicles and Transit Act, Act. No 22
of January 7, 2000, P.R. LAWS ANN. tit. 9, § 5123 (Law 22), as the section
      Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 2 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                 Page 2

of the Highway in which he was traveling had a posted speed limit of 65
mph.1
        After gauging Vicente-Lucas’ speed, Officer Dávila-Barrios drove
his patrol car alongside Vicente-Lucas’ until both were parallel to each
other. Officer Dávila-Barrios then observed that Vicente-Lucas’ vehicle
had     dark       tinted   windows,    and   testified    that   he   could    not   see   the
occupants of the vehicle nor the dashboard lighting inside.2 In Puerto
Rico, the altering of a motor vehicle’s windows with tints or other
materials that produce a percentage of transmission of visible light that
is less than 35 per cent is illegal. See § 10.05 of Law 22, P.R. LAWS ANN.
tit.    9,     §    5285.   Having     observed   that   Vicente-Lucas    was   possibly    in
violation of both sections 5.03 and 10.05 of Law 22, Officer Dávila-
Barrios engaged his lights and siren and ordered Vicente Lucas to pull
over his vehicle unto the hard shoulder lane. Officer Dávila-Barrios then
followed Vicente Lucas’ vehicle and parked his patrol car about five or
six feet behind, in an area under several lamp posts.
        Officer Dávila-Barrios approached the vehicle and noticed that the
driver’s window was open, allowing him to see the driver (Vicente-Lucas)
and his front passenger, Josué Díaz-Bermúdez, the other co-defendant in
this case (hereinafter “Díaz-Bermúdez”). Officer Alvarado also approached
the vehicle along its passenger side, in order to provide cover for his
partner. Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that at that point he was not
able to determine whether there were any more occupants in the backseat
of the vehicle, due to the tinting of the rear windows. He then informed
Vicente-Lucas of his traffic violations and ordered him to produce his


        1
        Said disposition states that “[i]t shall be illegal for any person to
drive a vehicle or motor vehicle on any public highway at a speed of less than
twenty (20) miles under the established maximum speed limit. This provision does
not apply when safe driving requires reduced speed, or on a hill, or when
driving a heavy motor vehicle which of necessity or in compliance with the law
is driven at a slow speed. An infraction of this provision shall be punished as
an administrative fault, with a fine of fifty dollars ($50).” Defendants at the
suppression hearing did not argue that any of the exceptions to the statute were
applicable.
      2
        Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that all of the windows of the vehicle
were tinted.
     Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 3 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                               Page 3

driver’s license and registration. Vicente-Lucas turned on a light inside
his vehicle and started to search for the documents. As he handed over
his documents, Officer Dávila-Barrios was able to observe the front part
of a weapon protruding from underneath Vicente-Lucas’ seat. About 12
inches of the front-end of the weapon were visible to Officer Dávila-
Barrios.
       Officer Dávila-Barrios immediately ordered Vicente Lucas to exit
the vehicle and then proceeded to seize the weapon, which turned out to
be a fully loaded Carbon-15 Pistol Caliber 5.56 NATO.3 The weapon also
had an additional magazine attached to it. Upon occupying it, Officer
Dávila-Barrios unloaded it and instructed Vicente-Lucas to move over next
to   his   patrol     car.   He    also    instructed     Officer    Alvarado   to   arrest
passenger Díaz-Bermúdez. Officer Dávila-Barrios then proceeded to arrest
Vicente-Lucas while reading him his rights under Miranda. During his
arrest, Vicente-Lucas was standing alongside the patrol car, about five
feet from the detained vehicle.
       Once Vicente-Lucas was placed under arrest, he told Officer Dávila-
Barrios that he had a permit to carry firearms. Vicente-Lucas told the
Officer that the permit was in his waist pouch, and the Officer proceeded
to   inspect    it    with   Vicente-Lucas’       permission.      However,   despite   the
seemingly     valid   license,     at     that   point   Officer    Dávila-Barrios    still
believed that Vicente-Lucas was in violation of the Puerto Rico Arms Act,
Act. No. 404 of September 11, 2000, P.R. LAWS ANN. tit. 25, § 455, et seq.
(the “Arms Act”). Section 2.02(d)(1) of the Arms Act confers licensees
the right to possess, bear and transport firearms, provided that they be
“borne, carried, and transported in a hidden and unobtrusive manner…”
P.R.   LAWS    ANN.   tit.   25,   §    456a(d)(1).      Section    1.02(x)   defines   the
transportation of a firearm as:
       the mediate or immediate possession of a weapon for the purpose of
       taking it from one place to another. Said transportation must be
       carried out by a person with a current weapons license and the


      3
        Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that it was a “long” firearm, about two
feet long, which also contained “long” magazines.
   Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 4 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                         Page 4

     weapon must be unloaded and transported inside a closed case whose
     contents are not visible and which may not be in plain sight. P.R.
     LAWS ANN. tit. 25, § 455(x) (our emphasis).

Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that, at the time he arrested Vicente-
Lucas,   he   believed   Vicente-Lucas   was   in   violation   of   the   referenced
dispositions of the Arms Act, as Vicente-Lucas’ weapon was loaded, in
plain sight and not in a holster.
     As this was transpiring, Officer Alvarado had already placed Díaz-
Bermúdez under arrest and had sat him down on the guardrail bordering the
road, as Díaz-Bermúdez was limping and using crutches. The guardrail was
an estimated two to three feet from Vicente-Lucas’ vehicle.
     Officer Dávila-Barrios then asked Vicente-Lucas whether he had any
additional firearms “or anything else” in the car. Vicente-Lucas replied
that he had another weapon in his vehicle which was unloaded and rested
inside a black bag on the backseat. Officer Dávila-Barrios proceeded to
move Vicente-Lucas right next to his partner and Díaz-Bermúdez. Then, as
he began to search inside a black bag situated on the back seat which he
thought contained the weapon, he found an inordinate amount of small
yellow bags, containing what he believed to be, from his experience as a
police officer, crack. He also found several blue bags as well as two
transparent bags containing a white powder, which from his experience he
understood to be cocaine. Vicente-Lucas allegedly told Officer Dávila-
Barrios that he did not know what those materials were and that they were
there because he had given his passenger a lift. Officer Dávila-Barrios
then took the bag to the patrol car and again asked Vicente-Lucas about
the location of the second firearm. He again replied that the weapon was
in the backseat of the car.
     Officer Dávila-Barrios, this time opening the right rear door of
the vehicle, was then able to find another black bag resting on the
backseat. This bag contained an unloaded weapon along with three loaded
magazines and a box containing an assortment of different bullet types.
    Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 5 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                          Page 5

The weapon in question turned out to be an FN Herstal Belgium handgun.4
Officer Dávila-Barrios then secured this weapon and placed it in the
patrol car. At this time both defendants were in close proximity (about
two or three feet) to the right rear door of Vicente-Lucas’ vehicle.
     Officers Dávila-Barrios and Alvarado then proceeded to pat down
defendants Vicente-Lucas and Díaz-Bermúdez, respectively, with Officer
Alvarado occupying a transparent bag with a white powder that he found on
Díaz-Bermúdez’s person.
     Afterwards, Officer Dávila-Barrios placed Vicente-Lucas inside his
patrol car, while Díaz-Bermúdez was placed in another patrol car that had
just arrived on the scene with two additional agents, one of which was a
shift supervisor. The Officers took custody of all the aforementioned
evidence   and   transported   the   defendants   to    the   PRPD   Salinas   Highway
Division Station. Officer Alvarado was tasked with driving Vicente-Lucas’
vehicle to the station, where he would rendezvous with the defendants and
the other officers.
     There, the vehicle’s windows were tested to determine whether they
were tinted in excess of the maximum limit prescribed by Law 22. They
were.5   Vicente-Lucas   was   then    given   two     tickets   for   both    traffic
violations and an inventory search of the vehicle was carried out.6 The
search also revealed more drug paraphernalia, as well as electronic gear,
plates, cards, a blender, spoons and baggies, all of which rested inside
a blue bag located behind the driver’s seat. Under the passenger seat, a
radio similar to the ones used by the PRPD was also found.
     In the end, as a result of this intervention, the seized evidence
consisted of: (1) a Carbon-15 Pistol 5.56 Caliber NATO; (2) an FN Herstal


     4
        Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that he believed the weapon to be a
“cop killer,” since it uses an ammunition type similar to the one used by
rifles.
      5
         A test carried out by Officer Alvarado revealed that the tints on
Vicente-Lucas’ vehicle were only allowing an eight per cent transmission of
visible light, when § 10.05 of Law 22 establishes a minimum of 35 per cent.
      6
        The officers performed a “P.P.R.-128” report on the vehicle, which is a
report the PRPD makes of a seized vehicle when it’s being investigated for
felony violations.
     Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 6 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                  Page 6

Belgium handgun; (3) one extended 5.7 x 28 magazine; (4) two standard 5.7
x 28 magazines; (5) several 5.7 x 28, 7.62 x 39 and .45 caliber rounds;
(6) seven hundred forty nine (749) baggies of crack cocaine; (7) seventy
five (75) baggies of cocaine; and (8) various drug paraphernalia items
including a scale, strainers, a blender, plastic baggies, razors, a plate
and spoons among other things.
      Based on the evidence, defendants Vicente-Lucas and Díaz-Bermúdez
were charged with: (1) possession with intent to distribute controlled
substances (cocaine), 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(c); (2) possession
with intent to distribute controlled substances (cocaine base), 21 U.S.C.
§   841(a)(1),   (b)(1)(c);    (3)   possession      of    a    firearm     during     and    in
relation to a drug trafficking crime, 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A). Docket
No. 11.
      Vicente-Lucas    is   now    requesting   the       suppression       of   all   of    the
aforementioned     evidence,      claiming    that    it       is   the    product     of     an
unreasonable     warrantless   search    of   his    vehicle,       in    violation    of    the
Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Specifically, he
claims that: (1) the traffic stop was not justified at its inception; and
(2) that as they were already secured and under arrest at the time the
search was effectuated, said search was illegal under the search incident
to arrest doctrine, as modified in the recent Supreme Court case of
Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. 332, 129 S.Ct. 1710 (2009).


                                   II.    Discussion

      The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that “[t]he
right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects,   against    unreasonable       searches    and       seizures,     shall     not   be
violated...” U.S. CONST. amend. IV.
      This Constitutional prohibition against unreasonable searches and
seizures applies to motor vehicles, South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S.
364 (1976); Hoffa v. United States, 385 U.S. 293 (1966), including their
interior. New York v. Class, 475 U.S. 106 (1986). When a search of a
      Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 7 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                         Page 7

motor vehicle is conducted without a warrant supported by probable cause,
it     is     presumptively        invalid,        unless     an    exception    to    the    warrant
requirement applies. Gant, 129 S.Ct. at 1723-24. The Supreme Court has
carved out a number of exceptions to searches and seizures in the vehicle
context, including: (1) the search incident to arrest, Gant, supra; (2)
the automobile exception, Carroll v. U.S., 267 U.S. 132 (1925); United
States       v.    Ross,    456    U.S.    798,    820-21;     (3)    the    community    caretaking
exception, Cady v. Dombrowski, 413 U.S. 433 (1973); and (4) the inventory
search, Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367 (1987), among others.
        The Court believes that the search conducted in the instant case
was reasonable and justified under several of the referenced exceptions.
The Court begins, however, by discussing the legality of the traffic stop
at its inception.
     A. The Violations of Puerto Rico’s Traffic Laws
        Temporary          detentions       of     individuals       during     the    stop   of    an
automobile by the police, even if only for a brief period and for a
limited purpose, constitute a “seizure” of “persons” within the meaning
of the Fourth Amendment. Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 809-10
(1996); Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653 (1979). An automobile stop
is     thus       subject    to    the    constitutional           imperative   that     it   not   be
“unreasonable” under the circumstances. As a general matter, the decision
to stop an automobile is reasonable where the police have probable cause
to believe that a traffic violation has occurred. See id. at 659.
        In     the    instant      case,     the    officers        had   observed     Vicente-Lucas
traveling in his vehicle at a speed of 38 mph, which is 27 mph less than
the allowed maximum speed limit of 65 mph for the section of the highway
in question. Officer Alvarado was able to clock the speed of the vehicle
via the use of the patrol car’s radar gun, thus allowing the officers to
acquire probable cause that defendants were in violation of § 5.03(a) of
Law 22 (traveling at more than 20 mph below the maximum allowed speed
limit). The officers’ suspicions were further aroused when they detected
that    Vicente-Lucas’            vehicle    sported        dark    tinted    windows,    which     the
     Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 8 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                         Page 8

officers reasonably believed were over the legal limit, as they were not
able to peer inside the vehicle to see its occupants. This by itself
created a reasonable belief in the officers minds that the defendants
were violating § 10.05 of Law 22 (establishing a limit on the amount of
tints a vehicle’s windows may have). The Court needs not go any further;
it concludes that, based on the officers’ observations, they had the
requisite     probable          cause   to    stop     Vicente-Lucas’          vehicle   for     both
violations of sections 5.03 and 10.05 of Law 22.
      Once the officers had signaled Vicente-Lucas to pull over for these
violations, Officer Dávila-Barrios was able to observe that Vicente-Lucas
was carrying a weapon in plain view under his seat. It is well settled
that a police officer's observation of an item in plain view does not
constitute a search so long as the officer makes his observation from a
lawful vantage point. Spencer v. Roche, ---F.3d----, 2011 WL 4916925, at
*6   (1st    Cir.        Oct.     18,   2011).        Here,    Officer        Dávila-Barrios      was
legitimately positioned right next to the vehicle’s window following a
lawful traffic stop. From this vantage point, he was able to observe
about 12 inches of the front part of a weapon protruding from under the
driver’s seat. As a safety precaution, he ordered Vicente-Lucas to exit
the vehicle and proceeded to unload the weapon. Subsequently, he lawfully
placed Vicente-Lucas under arrest as the weapon in question was loaded
and in plain view, in violation of the Puerto Rico Arms Act.
      So far, Vicente-Lucas’ arrest and the seizure of his first weapon
were within the limits of the Fourth Amendment. However, as soon as
Vicente-Lucas produced his license to carry firearms, defendants argue,
the officers were required to stop any further search of his vehicle and
release     him.   The     subsequent        search    to     recover    Vicente-Lucas’        second
weapon    from     the    backseat      of    the    vehicle,     their       argument   goes,   was
therefore invalid and a violation of Vicente-Lucas’ Fourth Amendment
rights. For the reasons outlined below, the Court is unconvinced. The
Court believes that the search in question was reasonable under the
circumstances,       and    justified        under    several    of     the    exceptions   to    the
      Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 9 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                         Page 9

warrant requirement for vehicle searches, namely: (i) the search incident
to    arrest       exception;      (ii)      the    automobile       exception;   and    (iii)    the
community caretaking doctrine. The Court will explain below.
     B. The Ensuing Search of the Vehicle
        i.     The Search Incident to Arrest Doctrine
       When conducted incident to a lawful custodial arrest, a full search
of the arrestee’s person for both weapons and evidence is permitted.
United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218, 235 (1973). Gant has clarified
that    a    vehicle      search       may   fall    within    the    search-incident-to-arrest
doctrine only in two very specific situations: (1) “when the arrestee is
unsecured and within reaching distance of the passenger compartment at
the time of the search” (the officer-safety justification); or (2) “when
it is reasonable to believe evidence relevant to the crime of arrest
might be found in the vehicle” (the evidence-preservation justification).
Gant, supra at 1719 (internal citations and quotations omitted).
       Vicente-Lucas argues that the first scenario is not met as Díaz-
Bermúdez and he were already placed under arrest and secured at the time
the search was carried out by the officers. The Court does not agree.
Although      it    is     true   that       both    Vicente-Lucas      and   Díaz–Bermúdez      were
handcuffed         at    the    time    Officer      Dávila-Barrios      recovered      the    second
firearm      from       their   vehicle,      they    were    nonetheless     standing    in   close
proximity to it (about two or three feet) and thus were arguably within
reaching distance of the passenger compartment. The defendants still had
not been placed inside the patrol car, had not been patted down, and were
not outnumbered by the police officers. Hence, the defendants were not
fully secured at the time, as was the case in Gant, where the defendant
was already handcuffed and inside the patrol car at the time of the
search. Furthermore, Officer Dávila-Barrios testified that at the time he
arrested Vicente-Lucas and asked him whether there were any additional
firearms in the car, he still did not know whether there were any more
occupants inside the back of the vehicle, due to the excessive tints on
the windows.
   Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 10 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                       Page 10

        The    principles        that   underpinned      the      decision     in    Gant,      namely
officer safety and evidentiary concerns, motivate this holding. Officer
Dávila-Barrios testified that he ordered Vicente-Lucas to step out of the
vehicle       for    his   (Dávila-Barrios’)        security,       because    he    did   not    know
whether there was anybody in the backseat, and because he thought it was
not common for someone to be carrying such a long firearm in the manner
carried by Vicente-Lucas, underneath the seat, loaded and partly visible.
After arresting Vicente-Lucas and learning that he had a second firearm
in the vehicle, Officer Dávila-Barrios proceeded to seize it as a safety
precaution. The Court believes this course of action to be reasonable
under the totality of the circumstances. Whether a search is reasonable
“is determined by assessing, on the one hand, the degree to which it
intrudes upon an individual's privacy and, on the other, the degree to
which     it    is     needed     for    the    promotion      of       legitimate    governmental
interests.” United States v. Knights, 534 U.S. 112, at 118-19 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
        In this case, both defendants were under arrest, not fully secured,
and had a diminished expectation of privacy as to their persons and the
vehicle. See Preston v. U.S., 376 U.S. 364, 366-67 (1964) (Although the
expectation of privacy in an automobile is not as great as that in a
home, an automobile is entitled to limited Fourth Amendment protection).
The government’s interest, on the other hand, was substantial. The police
intervention         was   carried      out    at   night,   on     a    crowded     highway     being
transited by vehicles traveling at speeds in excess of 65 miles per hour,
and close to the Salinas exit. Moreover, the first weapon seized was a
loaded Carbon-15 Pistol Caliber 5.56 NATO, which can handle the same
bullet    types       as    an    AR-15,      meaning   a    reasonable       officer      in     like
circumstances would regard the arrestees in this case as armed and highly
dangerous. It was thus not unreasonable for the officers to seek to
secure any other firearms in the vehicle before submitting Vicente-Lucas’
weapons permit to closer scrutiny. See e.g. United States v. McGregor,
650 F.3d 813, 820 (1st Cir. 2011) (if an officer “has some articulable,
      Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 11 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                 Page 11

reasonable suspicion that the persons stopped may be dangerous, he can
pat     them        down    and    search     the     car's      interior—including     closed
compartments—for weapons that they could quickly lay their hands on … but
the     scope       of     the    search     must   be     limited    to    this    protective
purpose”)(quoting Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 1037, 1049-50 (1983).
The Court has no reason to doubt that Officer Dávila-Barrios actions in
searching the vehicle were limited to the protective purpose of securing
a potentially dangerous firearm.
        As     to    the    second     exception      of   the    search-incident-to-arrest
doctrine, the evidentiary preservation component, Vicente-Lucas argues
that the officers misunderstood the law as it pertained to his authority
to carry weapons under his weapons permit. He claims that the officers’
belief that there was probable cause or reasonable suspicion to search
his vehicle for evidence pertaining to the crime of his arrest was
objectively unreasonable, as the officers failed to understand that he
was authorized to carry those weapons pursuant to his permit. Vicente-
Lucas’ argument fails, however, as the first weapon that was seized was
clearly being transported in violation of the Arms Act. As the First
Circuit has stated in United States v. Polanco, 634 F.3d 39, 43 (1st Cir.
2011), officers need only a reasonable basis to carry out a search under
the evidentiary preservation component of Gant. Here, after being told by
Vicente-Lucas that there was a second firearm in the car, any reasonable
officer in like circumstances could have reasonably suspected that the
vehicle contained weapons being transported in violation of the Arms Act.
        For    these       reasons,    the   search      conducted   by    the   officers   was
justified under the search-incident-to-arrest doctrine.
       ii.      The Automobile Exception
        Generally, the Fourth Amendment does not require that police obtain
a warrant to search an automobile when they have probable cause to
believe it contains contraband or evidence of criminal activity. Ross,
supra at 808-09; United States v. Bucci, 582 F.3d 108, 117-18 (1st Cir.
2009).       This     exception       to   the   warrant      requirement—the      “automobile
   Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 12 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                               Page 12

exception”—stems from both the inherent mobility of vehicles and the
reduced    expectation        of    privacy     that   results    from     their   pervasive
regulation. Pennsylvania v. Labron, 518 U.S. 938, 940 (1996). Even if a
vehicle’s mobility is temporarily restricted or potential drivers have
been secured, warrantless vehicle searches supported by probable cause
are generally valid. Id.
        The First Circuit has noted that the auto exception is distinct
from the evidence-preservation component of Gant’s search incident to
arrest analysis, in that the auto exception extends beyond the crime of
arrest. Polanco, supra at 42-43. The evidence preservation component of
the Gant search incident to arrest analysis, on its part, does not extend
to evidence of other offenses, and only requires a “reasonable basis”.
Id. The auto exception, of course, requires probable cause, focused on
what the agents knew at the time they searched the car. United States v.
López,    380       F.3d   538,    543   (1st   Cir.   2004)(internal       quotations    and
citations omitted).
        Considering the totality of circumstances present in this case, the
Court believes that the officers had probable cause to search Vicente-
Lucas’    vehicle      for    weapons    that   were   possibly    being    transported    in
violation of the Puerto Rico Arms Act. First of all, defendants were
travelling in a suspicious manner, riding at 38 mph on a 65 mph marked
highway, and doing so on the left (or fast) lane. Second, the vehicle in
question appeared to have its windows tinted to an extent that the
officers could not peer into the vehicle to see its occupants. As soon as
the officers flagged the vehicle down and approached it, they became
aware that it contained a long weapon in plain view, partially hidden
under Vicente-Lucas’ seat, and which was clearly in violation of the Arms
Act. At this point, the officers had probable cause to search the vehicle
for weapons, and even more so after defendant Vicente-Lucas, who had
already been given Miranda warnings, told officer Dávila-Barrios that
there    was    a    second   weapon     in   the   car.   When   officer    Dávila-Barrios
proceeded to secure the weapon, he found a cache of controlled substances
    Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 13 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                                       Page 13

which are the focus of this motion to suppress. If, during a weapons
search, an officer discovers contraband other than weapons, he or she
need    not    ignore    the   contraband.      Long,      supra    at    1050.    Thus,     as    the
officers had probable cause to search the vehicle under the automobile
exception,      for     this   reason    alone       the    Court    is     entitled       to     deny
defendant’s motion to suppress.
       iii.    The Community Caretaking Doctrine
        Lastly, the Court believes that the present search can also be
justified under the community caretaking doctrine. The Supreme Court
established the community caretaking doctrine in the case of Cady v.
Dombrowski,      supra.    There,     after    the   defendant’s         car   struck    a      bridge
abutment, the police arranged for the disabled car to be towed to a
privately owned service station. The defendant, who identified himself as
a   Chicago     policeman,      was     then    arrested      for        drunken    driving        and
hospitalized because of his injuries. The police, believing that Chicago
policemen were required to carry their revolvers at all times and noting
that no weapon had been found on defendant’s person, looked for the
weapon    in    the     defendant’s     car    but   found    evidence         which    ultimately
connected defendant with a subsequently discovered murder. The Court,
after holding that removal of the car to the service station was proper,
upheld the search, and reasoned that the search was justified due to
concern
        for the safety of the general public who might be endangered if an
        intruder removed a revolver from the trunk of the vehicle.... Where,
        as here, the trunk of an automobile, which the officer reasonably
        believed to contain a gun, was vulnerable to intrusion by vandals,
        we hold that the search was not ‘unreasonable’ within the meaning of
        the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. Cady, supra at 447-48.

It is important to recognize that the community caretaking function is
“totally divorced from the detection, investigation, or acquisition of
evidence relating to the violation of a criminal statute.” Cady, supra at
441; United States v. Rodríguez-Morales, 929 F.2d 780, 785 (1st Cir.
1991). Thus, as long as such caretaking activities are warranted “either
in terms of state law or sound police procedure,” they do not offend the
   Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 14 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                                       Page 14

Fourth Amendment. Consequently, evidence which comes to light during the
due execution of the caretaking function is ordinarily admissible at
trial. See United States v. Lott, 870 F.2d 778, 781 (1st Cir. 1989).
        If the detained vehicle is to be left on the street at the place of
arrest rather than impounded, then it would appear that the vehicle may
be immediately searched if there is probable cause to believe it contains
a weapon. W. LaFave, Search and Seizure, § 7.4(c) (4th ed. 2004). See
also United States v. Isham, 501 F.2d 989 (6th Cir. 1974) (When officer
saw a box of ammunition in the defendant’s vehicle he asked defendant if
he had gun in the vehicle and received affirmative response; held that
under Cady if police know that weapon is present in car “where it is
vulnerable to possible theft and criminal use, police seizure of it as a
public safety measure is “reasonable,” and police are not required to
post a guard while a warrant is issued).
        Although the instant case is not factually identical to Cady—as the
officers had still not taken custody of Vicente-Lucas’s vehicle when the
search to recover the second weapon was effectuated—the Court believes
that some of the factors that predicated the decision in Cady are present
here. The defendants had been arrested for violating the Arms Act and
their vehicle was on a crowded highway. At that point, it was unclear
whether the defendants would be taken to a station and whether the
officers would take custody of the vehicle (which they ended up doing
after    finding   the   drugs).   The   Court   finds   it   was   reasonable   as   a
community caretaking function to retrieve the second firearm from the
vehicle while it was unattended. This in order to prevent third parties
who might arrive on the scene during the intervention from reaching it or
in case the vehicle would be left on the highway or at another location
where it could be subject to theft while the officers conducted further
background checks on the defendants. While one may argue that Officer
Dávila-Barrios’ search of the vehicle to retrieve the second weapon was
carried out pursuant to the police’s investigative and evidence-gathering
functions, it is also true that the Officer acted out of concerns for his
   Case 3:11-cr-00132-PG Document 41 Filed 11/09/11 Page 15 of 15
Crim. No. 11-0132 (PG)                                              Page 15

own safety and that of others in conducting the search. In any event, the
coexistence of investigatory and caretaking motives will not invalidate
the seizure. Rodríguez-Morales, supra at 787.


                              III. Conclusion

     For the reasons elucidated above, the Court DENIES Vicente-Lucas’
Motion to Suppress.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
     In San Juan, Puerto Rico, November 9, 2011


                                            S/ JUAN M. PEREZ-GIMENEZ
                                            JUAN M. PEREZ-GIMENEZ
                                            SENIOR U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE
