              Case 3:12-cr-00298-DRD Document 34 Filed 08/03/12 Page 1 of 5



                                IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
                                                                    CRIMINAL NO. 12-298 (DRD)
         Plaintiff
         v.
GABRIEL VELAZQUEZ-RIVERA,
         Defendant.



                MAGISTRATE JUDGE’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
                       RE: RULE 11(b) GUILTY PLEA HEARING
I.       Procedural Background
         On April 18, 2012, defendant Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera was charged in a one-count
indictment. He agrees to plead guilty to that count.
         Count One charges that Mr. Velazquez, on or about March 30, 2012, did knowingly and
unlawfully possess a machine gun, as that term is defined under federal law, all in violation of 18
U.S.C. Section 922(o).
         Defendant appeared before me, assisted by the court interpreter, on July 30, 2012, since the
Rule 11 hearing was referred by the court. See United States v. Woodard, 387 F.3d 1329 (11th Cir.
2004) (magistrate judge had authority to conduct Rule 11 guilty plea hearing with consent of
defendant). He was advised of the purpose of the hearing and placed under oath with instructions
that his answers must be truthful lest he would subject himself to possible charges of perjury or
making a false statement.
II.      Consent to Proceed Before a Magistrate Judge
         Defendant was provided with a Waiver of Right to Trial by Jury form, which he signed.1 He
confirmed that his attorney translated the contents of the waiver form into Spanish. He was advised
of his right to hold all proceedings, including the change of plea hearing, before a district court


         1
            The form entitled Consent to Proceed Before a United States Magistrate Judge in a Felony Case for Pleading Guilty
(Rule 11, Fed.R.Crim.P.) and Waiver of Jury Trial, signed and consented by both parties is made part of the record.
          Case 3:12-cr-00298-DRD Document 34 Filed 08/03/12 Page 2 of 5



USA v. Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera                                                                 Page 2
CR. No. 12-298 (DRD)
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION ON GUILTY PLEA

judge. He received an explanation of the differences between the scope of jurisdiction and functions
of a district judge and a magistrate judge. He was informed that if he elects to proceed before a
magistrate judge, then the magistrate judge will conduct the hearing and prepare a report and
recommendation, subject to review and approval of the district judge. The defendant then
voluntarily consented to proceed before a magistrate judge.
III.    Proceedings Under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure
        Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure governs the acceptance of guilty pleas
to federal criminal violations. Pursuant to Rule 11, in order for a plea of guilty to constitute a valid
waiver of the defendant’s right to trial, the guilty plea must be knowing and voluntary. United States
v. Hernandez-Wilson, 186 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1999). “Rule 11 was intended to ensure that a
defendant who pleads guilty does so with an ‘understanding of the nature of the charge and
consequences of his plea.’” United States v. Cotal-Crespo, 47 F3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting
McCarthy v. United States, 394 U.S. 459, 467 (1969)). There are three core concerns in a Rule 11
proceeding: 1) absence of coercion; 2) understanding of the charges; and 3) knowledge of the
consequences of the guilty plea. Cotal-Crespo, 47 F3d at 4 (citing United States v. Allard, 926 F2d
1237, 1244 (1st Cir. 1991)).
        A.      Competence to Enter a Guilty Plea
        This magistrate judge questioned the defendant about his age, education, employment,
history of any treatment for mental illness or addiction, use of any medication, drugs, or alcohol, and
his understanding of the purpose of the hearing, all in order to ascertain his capacity to understand,
answer and comprehend the change of plea colloquy. The court confirmed that the defendant
received the indictment and fully discussed the charge with his counsel and was satisfied with the
advice and representation he received. The court further inquired whether defendant’s counsel or
counsel for the government had any doubt as to his capacity to plead, receiving answers from both
that the defendant was competent to enter a plea. After considering the defendant’s responses, and
observing his demeanor, a finding was made that Mr. Velazquez was competent to plead and fully
aware of the purpose of the hearing.
             Case 3:12-cr-00298-DRD Document 34 Filed 08/03/12 Page 3 of 5



USA v. Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera                                                                 Page 3
CR. No. 12-298 (DRD)
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION ON GUILTY PLEA

        B.       Maximum Penalties and Consequences of Guilty Plea
        Upon questioning, the defendant expressed his understanding of the maximum penalties
prescribed by statute for the offense to which he was pleading guilty, namely, a term of
imprisonment of not more than ten years, a fine of not more than $250,000.00, a supervised release
term of up to three years, and a Special Monetary Assessment of $100.00. The defendant was
further informed that the court had the authority to issue an order of forfeiture of the firearm and
ammunition involved in the offense. The defendant indicated that he understood the maximum
penalties.
        The defendant was informed that parole has been abolished and that any sentence of
imprisonment must be served. Defendant was additionally informed that a pre-sentence report
would be prepared and considered by the district judge at sentencing. The court also explained that
the guilty plea may result in defendant’s loss of valuable civil rights. The defendant confirmed that he
understood these consequences of his guilty plea.
        C.       Sentencing Procedures
        The defendant was specifically informed that the district court, after considering the
applicable Sentencing Guidelines, could impose a sentence different from any estimate provided
by his attorney, and that the court had authority to impose a sentence that is more severe or less
severe than the sentence called for by the Sentencing Guidelines, and that he would not be allowed
to withdraw his guilty plea for the sole reason that he received a sentence more severe than he might
anticipate. The defendant was advised, and understood, that the Sentencing Guidelines are no longer
mandatory and are thus considered advisory, and that during sentencing the court will consider the
sentencing criteria found at 18, United States Code, Section 3553(a).
        D.       Waiver of Constitutional Rights
        The defendant was specifically advised that he has the right to persist in a plea of not guilty,
and if he does so persist that he has the right to a speedy and public trial by jury, or before a judge
sitting without a jury if the court and the government so agree; that at trial he would be presumed
            Case 3:12-cr-00298-DRD Document 34 Filed 08/03/12 Page 4 of 5



USA v. Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera                                                                  Page 4
CR. No. 12-298 (DRD)
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION ON GUILTY PLEA

innocent and the government would have to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; that he
would have the right to assistance of counsel for his defense, and if he could not afford an attorney
the court would appoint one to represent him throughout all stages of the proceedings; that at trial
he would have the right to hear and cross examine the government’s witnesses, the right to decline
to testify unless he voluntarily elected to do so, and the right to the issuance of subpoenas or
compulsory process to compel the attendance of witnesses to testify on his behalf. He was further
informed that if he decided not to testify or put on evidence at trial, his failure to do so could not be
used against him, and that at trial the jury must return a unanimous verdict before he could be found
guilty.
          The defendant specifically acknowledged understanding these rights, and understanding that
by entering a plea of guilty there would be no trial and he will be waiving or giving up the rights that
the court explained.
          E.     Factual Basis for the Guilty Plea
          Defendant was read in open court Count One of the indictment and provided an explanation
of the elements of the offense. The meaning of terms used in the indictment was explained.
          Upon questioning, the government presented to this magistrate judge and to defendant a
summary of the basis in fact for the offenses charged in Count One and the evidence the government
had available to establish, in the event defendant elected to go to trial, the defendant’s guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt. The defendant was able to understand this explanation and, subject to certain
exceptions that did not effect the elements of the offense, admitted to the government’s submission
as to the evidence which could have been presented at trial.
F.        Voluntariness
          The defendant indicated that he was not being induced to plead guilty, but was entering such
a plea freely and voluntarily because in fact he is guilty, and that no one had threatened him or
offered him a thing of value in exchange for his plea. He acknowledged that no one had made any
promises in exchange for his guilty plea. Throughout the hearing the defendant was able to consult
with his attorney.
          Case 3:12-cr-00298-DRD Document 34 Filed 08/03/12 Page 5 of 5



USA v. Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera                                                               Page 5
CR. No. 12-298 (DRD)
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION ON GUILTY PLEA

IV.    Conclusion
       The defendant, by consent, appeared before me pursuant to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedure, and entered a plea of guilty as to Count One of the indictment.
       After cautioning and examining the defendant under oath and in open court concerning each
of the subject matters mentioned in Rule 11, I find that the defendant, Gabriel Velazquez-Rivera,
is competent to enter this guilty plea, is aware of the nature of the offense charged and the maximum
statutory penalties that it carries, understands that the charge is supported by evidence and a basis
in fact, has admitted to the elements of the offense, and has done so in an intelligent and voluntary
manner with full knowledge of the consequences of his guilty plea. Therefore, I recommend that
the court accept the guilty plea and that the defendant be adjudged guilty as to Count One of the
indictment.
       This report and recommendation is filed pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1)(B) and Rule 72(d)
of the Local Rules of this Court. Any objections to the same must be specific and must be filed with
the Clerk of Court within fourteen (14) days of its receipt.     Failure to file timely and specific
objections to the report and recommendation is a waiver of the right to review by the district court.
United States v. Valencia-Copete, 792 F.2d 4 (1st Cir. 1986).
       A Sentencing hearing will be set before the presiding district judge.
       IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
       San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 30th day of July, 2012.


                                      S/Bruce J. McGiverin
                                      BRUCE J. McGIVERIN
                                      United States Magistrate Judge
