      Case 3:10-cr-00325-CCC Document 220 Filed 07/20/12 Page 1 of 4



                      IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                        FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO


 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
 Plaintiff
 vs                                                CRIMINAL 10-325CCC
 1) ABRAHAM SANCHEZ-CUPRILL
 2) ABRAHAM GONZALEZ-SANCHEZ
 3) DAVID MALDONADO-ROSADO
 Defendants



                                          ORDER

        Defendant Abraham González-Sánchez (2) moved to dismiss Counts Four and Seven

of the Indictment on September 18, 2011 (docket entry 133), claiming that the charges there

contained --the knowing possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime on

April 8 and April 10, 2010-- were returned by the Grand Jury based on materially false

evidence.    Defendant David Maldonado-Rosado (3) later joined that motion (docket

entry 159), seeking the dismissal on those same grounds of Count Eight of the Indictment,

which charged him with also possessing a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime

on April 15, 2012. In essence, defendants ground the dismissal request on their assertion

that the weapons used by them during the alleged drug trafficking transactions were fake,

and further claim that the government knew of this because (1) “the government undercover

agents and/or cooperating individuals posing as drug dealers personally handled the fake

weapons” and (2) “the FBI agents that arrested codefendant Abraham González-Sánchez,

upon handling the weapon introduced in evidence, immediately noticed that it was fake.”

Response to United States’ Opposition to Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss (docket entry 206),

at p. 206. The United States opposed the motions (docket entry 151), averring that

defendants had failed to present any evidence that the grand jury was presented with false
    Case 3:10-cr-00325-CCC Document 220 Filed 07/20/12 Page 2 of 4



CRIMINAL 10-0325CCC                           2

evidence other than self-serving claims that the guns they possessed during the drug

transactions were fake.

       The matter was referred to U.S. Magistrate Judge Camille L. Vélez-Rivé on

September 21, 2011 (docket entry 137), who conducted three evidentiary hearings at which

both movants and their weapons’ expert testified. She also required the government to

produce the transcript of the indicting grand jury proceedings for an in camera inspection

(docket entry 193), an Order which the government vigorously challenged (docket entry 196)

but that we ultimately upheld (docket entry 201). After considering all the evidence

presented at the hearings and the grand jury transcripts, the Magistrate Judge issued a

Report and Recommendation (R&R) on May 8, 2012 (docket entry 208) where she

concluded that “[t]he record . . . [did] not support defendants’ motion to dismiss due to false

testimony presented by the government to the grand jury.” R&R, at p. 20. She, thus,

recommended that the motion to dismiss be denied.

       Defendants objected to the R&R on May 29, 2012 (docket entry 214), claiming that

the Magistrate Judge had erred in recommending denial of the dismissal motion. They

categorically claim that during the evidentiary hearings they “proved that on April 8 and

April 15, 2010, they were carrying ‘fake guns’ purchased by defendant González-Sánchez

at the New Star Locksmith Shop at the Cantón Mall in Bayamón” (docket entry 214, at p. 3),

and that it necessarily followed that “[t]he grand jury was falsely told that the defendant[s

were] in possession of a ‘firearm’ in furtherance of a ‘sham’ drug trafficking crime.” Docket

entry 214, at p. 8. We have reviewed the transcripts of the three evidentiary hearings held

before the Magistrate Judge (docket entries 172, 197 and 207), and in all earnest fail to see

how the evidence there presented necessarily leads to the conclusion that defendants would

want us to reach: that the grand jury was presented with materially false evidence as to their

alleged possession of firearms in relation to a drug trafficking crime. If anything, the
    Case 3:10-cr-00325-CCC Document 220 Filed 07/20/12 Page 3 of 4



CRIMINAL 10-0325CCC                           3

hearings allowed both defendants to rehearse what will most probably be their defense at

trial --that days before the offense González-Sánchez had bought fake weapons at a

shopping mall, and that said fake weapons were the ones actually used by him and

Maldonado-Rosado when they allegedly committed the offense. This last fact, however,

cannot be decisively established based only on defendants’ self-serving testimonies, as the

Magistrate-Judge correctly concluded. R&R, at p. 17. To hold, at this juncture, that the

weapons used by defendants during the sham drug transactions were fake weapons only

because they so state would be tantamount to absolving them on the weapons charges

without allowing the government to discharge its burden of proof at a trial. Suffice it to say,

on the limited matter now before us, that enough evidence was introduced before the grand

jury to allow a return of an Indictment against defendants on Counts Four, Seven and Eight,

as a review of the grand jury transcripts plainly confirms. The evidence submitted by

defendants before the Magistrate Judge failed to establish that the grand jury was presented

with false evidence or that the government knew that the evidence was false,1 as the

Magistrate Judge found. Hence, defendants having failed to meet their burden as to the

grounds on which their dismissal motion was based, the Magistrate Judge’s Report and

Recommendation (docket entry 208) is APPROVED and ADOPTED and their Motions to

Dismiss Counts Four, Seven and Eight of the Indictment (docket entry 133, see also docket

entry 159) are DENIED.



       1
        As noted above, defendants had alleged in their motions that knowledge by the
government of the evidence’s falsity was established because allegedly undercover agents
and/or cooperating individuals posing as drug dealers personally handled the fake weapons
and the FBI agents that later arrested González-Sánchez, upon handling one of the
weapons, immediately noticed that it was fake. Of course, in order to make these crucial
findings the Court would have to first make a favorable credibility assessment to conclude
that the weapons used by defendants when they allegedly committed the offense were in
fact the fake weapons previously bought by González-Sánchez and not some other,
genuine, weapons. This, however, was far from established by the self-serving evidence
presented by defendants at the hearings.
   Case 3:10-cr-00325-CCC Document 220 Filed 07/20/12 Page 4 of 4



CRIMINAL 10-0325CCC                       4

      The   trial   of   defendants   Abraham   González-Sánchez   (1)   and   David

Maldonado-Rosado (3) will be reset by separate Order.

      SO ORDERED.

      At San Juan, Puerto Rico, on July 20, 2012.



                                              S/CARMEN CONSUELO CEREZO
                                              United States District Judge
