         Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 1 of 8



                      IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                        FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

 Plaintiff,

               v.                                       CRIMINAL NO. 12-572 (DRD)

 ALBERTO CASTILLO-PACHECO,

 Defendant.


                        REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

       Defendant Alberto Castillo-Pacheco was charged in Count One of an Indictment and

he agreed to plead guilty to the only Count of the Indictment. Count One charges that, from

in or about July 12, 2012, in the District of Puerto Rico, and within the jurisdiction of this

Court, the defendant herein, having been convicted in court of a crime punishable by

imprisonment for a term exceeding one (1) year, did knowingly and unlawfully possess in

and affecting interstate or foreign commerce, a firearm and ammunition, as those terms are

defined in Title 18, United States Code, § 921(a)(3) and (17)(A) respectively, that is, a Smith

and Wesson pistol, model SW9VE, bearing serial number RAZ7100, 9mm caliber, loaded

with fifteen (15) rounds of 9mm caliber ammunition; two (2) 9mm magazines; ninety-six

(96) rounds of 9mm ammunition; thirty-six (36) rounds of .40 caliber ammunition; one (1)

round of .223 ammunition; one (1) extended magazine for .40 caliber ammunition, said

firearm and ammunition, having been shipped and transported in interstate or foreign

commerce. All in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 922(g)(1) and 924(a)(2).

       On April 3, 2013, defendant appeared before this Magistrate Judge, since the Rule11

hearing was referred by the Court. Defendant was provided with a Waiver of Right to Trial
            Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 2 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 2

by Jury, which he signed and agreed upon voluntarily after examination in open court,

under oath.

         Defendant indicated and confirmed his intention to plead guilty to Count One of the

Indictment, upon being advised of his right to have said proceedings before a district judge

of this court.1 Upon verifying through defendant’s statement his age, education and any

relevant aspect as to the use of medication, drugs, alcohol or substance dependency, and

psychological or psychiatric condition, to ascertain his capacity and ability to understand,

answer and comprehend the interactive colloquy with this Magistrate Judge, a

determination was made as to defendant’s competency and ability to understand the

proceedings.

         Having further advised defendant of the charges contained in above-stated Count

One, he was examined and verified as being correct that: he had consulted with his counsel,

Rafael Castro-Lang, prior to the hearing for change of plea, that he was satisfied with the

services provided by his legal representative and had time to discuss with him all aspects

of the case, insofar, among other things, regarding the change of plea, the consent to

proceed before a United States Magistrate Judge, the content of the Indictment and the

charges therein, his constitutional rights and the consequences of the waiver of same.

         Defendant was specifically apprised by this Magistrate Judge that, upon withdrawing

his initial plea of not guilty and now entering a plea of guilty to the charge specified, he was

waiving his right to a public, speedy, and a trial by jury constituted by twelve jurors who

have to unanimously agree to a verdict. He was also waiving his right to be presumed

         1
           The form entitled Consent to Proceed Before a United States Magistrate Judge in a Felony Case for Pleading
Guilty (Rule 11, Fed.R.Crim.P.) and Waiver of Jury Trial, signed and consented by both parties is made part of the record.
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 3 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 3

innocent and for the government to meet the obligation of establishing his guilt beyond a

reasonable doubt. Furthermore, he was waiving his right during said trial to confront the

witnesses who were to testify against him and be able to cross-examine them, through

counsel at said trial, as well as present evidence on his behalf. He was also waiving the right

to compel the attendance of witnesses and that subpoenas be issued to have them appear

in court to testify. Defendant was specifically apprised of his right to take the stand and

testify, if he so decided, or not to testify, and no inference or decision as to his guilt could

be made from the fact if he decides not to testify. Defendant was also explained his right

not to incriminate himself; that upon such a waiver of all above-discussed rights a judgment

of guilty and his sentence were to be based on his plea of guilty, and he would be sentenced

by the judge after considering the information contained in a pre-sentence report.

         As to all the above, defendant provided an individualized and positive

acknowledgment of each and every waiver and, with the assistance of his counsel Castro-

Lang, indicated he freely and voluntarily waived those rights and understood the

consequences. During all this colloquy, defendant was made aware that he could freely

request from this Magistrate Judge any additional clarification, repetition, or ask questions

and that he may consult with his attorney at any given time as to any issue.

         Defendant expressed his understanding of the penalties prescribed by statute for the

offenses as to which he was pleading guilty. The penalty for the offense charged in Count

One is a term of imprisonment of not more than ten (10) years, a fine not to exceed two

hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) and a term of supervised release of not more

than three (3) years.
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 4 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 4

         Defendant shall also pay a special monetary assessment of one hundred dollars

($100.00), per count of conviction.

         Having ascertained directly from defendant that he had not been induced in any way

to plead guilty, that no one had forced him in any way to plead guilty, nor that he had been

offered any reward or any other thing of value to get him to plead guilty, the document

entitled “Plea Agreement (Pursuant to Rule 11(c)(1)(A) & (B) FRCP)” (“the Agreement”) and

the “Plea Agreement Supplement”2 were shown to defendant, verifying his signature and

initials on each and every page.

         Pursuant to said Agreement, and insofar as Count One, as to which defendant

already was aware of the maximum possible penalties, defendant was apprised that it was

up to the sole discretion of the sentencing court what the sentence to be imposed on him

will be. Defendant was specifically informed that if the sentencing court were to impose a

sentence which turned out to be higher or more severe than the one he might be expecting,

for said reason alone, defendant would have no grounds for the court to allow him to

withdraw his plea of guilty.

         The above-captioned parties’ estimate and agreement that appears on pages three

and four, paragraph seven of the Agreement, regarding the possible applicable advisory

Sentencing Guidelines, were further elaborated and explained. Pursuant to U.S.S.G. §

2K2.1(a)(6), the Base Offense Level is of Fourteen (14). Pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1, a




          2
            Defendant acknowledged discussing the “Plea Agreement Supplement” with his counsel and stated he
understood the terms and consequences of the same. Defense counsel recognized he explained to defendant the content
of the “Plea Agreement Supplement” and explained to defendant its consequences.
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 5 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 5

decrease of two (2) levels is agreed for acceptance of responsibility. Therefore, the Total

Offense Level is of Twelve (12).

         There is no stipulation as to defendant’s Criminal History Category.

         The parties agree to recommend to the Court that the defendant be sentenced to

serve a term of imprisonment at the lower end of the applicable guideline range.

         The United States and the defendant agree that no further adjustments or departures

to the defendant’s base offense level shall be sought by the parties. Any request by the

defendant for a sentence of imprisonment below the agreed upon term of imprisonment

should constitute a breach of this plea agreement.

         As part of the written Agreement, the government, the defendant, and his counsel

also agreed they are aware that the Sentencing Guidelines are no longer mandatory and are

thus considered advisory.

         Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(d) and 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c), defendant agrees to forfeit

all of his right, title, and interest in the following property (hereafter, collectively, the

“Property”): a Smith and Wesson pistol, model SW9VE, bearing serial number RAZ7100,

9mm caliber, loaded with fifteen (15) rounds of 9mm caliber ammunition; two (2) 9mm

magazines; ninety-six (96) rounds of 9mm ammunition; thirty-six (36) rounds of .40

caliber ammunition; one (1) round of .223 ammunition; one (1) extended magazine for .40

caliber ammunition. Defendant acknowledges that he possessed the Property in violation

of Title 18, United States Code, Section 922(g) as set forth in the Indictment, and that the

Property is therefore subject to forfeiture to the United States pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §

924(d) and 28 U.S.C. § 2461(c).
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 6 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 6

         The government presented to this Magistrate Judge and to defendant, assisted by

his counsel, a summary of the basis in fact for the offenses charged and the evidence the

government had available to establish, in the event defendant had elected to go to trial, the

commission of the offense, beyond a reasonable doubt. Counsel and defendant

acknowledged the evidence of the government was fully disclosed to them and previously

discussed between the two. Defendant was also read and shown a document entitled

“Stipulated Statement of Facts”, which had been signed by defendant and his counsel and

is attached to the Agreement, wherein the signature of counsel for the government also

appears.      Defendant was able to understand the explanation and agreed with the

government’s submission.

         Defendant was explained that the Agreement with the government does not bind any

other district, except the district of Puerto Rico, and it contained all the promises, terms and

conditions which defendant, his attorney and the government, have entered.

         Having once more ascertained that defendant has indicated not being induced to

plead guilty, and was entering such a plea because in fact he is guilty, without any promises

or predictions being made as to the sentence to be imposed by the court, defendant was

informed that parole has been abolished under the advisory Sentencing Reform Act and

that any sentence of imprisonment would be served, without him being released on parole.

Defendant was additionally informed that prior to sentence, the sentencing judge will have

a pre-sentence report and that it would be made available to him, to his counsel and to the

government, so that they be allowed to correct or object to any information contained in

said report which was not accurate.
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 7 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 7

         Defendant was informed that he can appeal his conviction if he believes that his

guilty plea was somehow unlawful or involuntary or if there is some other fundamental

defect in the proceedings which was not waived by his guilty plea. Defendant was also

informed that he has a statutory right to appeal his sentence under certain circumstances

particularly if the sentence is contrary to law. With few exceptions, any notice of appeal

must be filed within fourteen (14) days of judgment being entered in the case. Defendant

was also apprised the right to appeal is subject to certain limitations allowed by law because

his Plea Agreement contains a waiver of appeal in paragraph nine (9) which was read to

defendant in open court. Defendant recognized having knowledge of the waiver of appeal,

discussing the same with his counsel and understanding its consequences. Defense counsel

acknowledged discussing the waiver of appeal and its consequences with his client.

         Defendant waived the reading of the Indictment in open court because he is aware

of its content, indicating he availed himself of the opportunity to further discuss same with

his attorney and then he positively stated that what was contained in Count One was what

he had done and to which he was pleading guilty during these proceedings. Thereafter,

defendant expressed in no uncertain terms that he agreed with the government’s evidence

as to his participation in the offense. Thereupon, defendant indicated he was pleading

guilty to Count One of the Indictment in Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD).

         This Magistrate Judge after having explained to the defendant his rights,

ascertaining that he was acting freely and voluntarily to the waiver of such rights and in his

decision of pleading guilty, with full knowledge of the consequences thereof, and there
           Case 3:12-cr-00572-DRD Document 42 Filed 04/12/13 Page 8 of 8



United States of America v. Alberto Castillo-Pacheco
Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation
Page 8

being a basis in fact for such a plea, is recommending that a plea of guilty be entered as to

Count One of the Indictment in Criminal No. 12-572 (DRD).

         IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.

         The sentencing hearing is set for August 9, 2013 at 9:30 a.m., before Honorable

Daniel R. Domínguez, District Court Judge.

         San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 3rd day of April of 2013.

                                                       s/ CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
                                                       CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
                                                       UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
