          Case 1:10-cr-00088-SM Document 47 Filed 08/12/10 Page 1 of 3




                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                         DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE


United States of America,
     Government

     v.                                   Criminal No. 10-cr-88-3-SM

Brittney Indoccio,
     Defendant


                                  O R D E R


     Defendant was released pending trial upon conditions.               She

promptly violated those conditions by using marijuana, using

cocaine, and missing three drug treatment appointments and one

probation visit.      Accordingly, revocation of her release on bail

was sought and, after a hearing, the Magistrate Judge revoked

defendant’s bail, finding probable cause to believe that she

committed other crimes while on release (drug felonies) (document

no. 20).     The Magistrate Judge also found that defendant’s

conduct established that she is unlikely to abide by any

condition or combination of conditions of release that might be

imposed.



     That determination was reviewed by a different Magistrate

Judge upon defendant’s request and, after hearing, the revocation

order was left undisturbed.
       Case 1:10-cr-00088-SM Document 47 Filed 08/12/10 Page 2 of 3



     The provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 3148 are straightforward.

Revocation of bail is an authorized sanction for failure to

comply with the terms of release set by the court if, after a

hearing, the judicial officer granting bail:


     (1) finds that there is -

            (A) probable cause to believe that the person has
            committed a Federal, State, or local crime while on
            release; or

            (B) clear and convincing evidence that the person has
            violated any other condition of release; and

     (2) finds that -

            (A) based on the factors set forth in section 3142(g)
            of this title, there is no condition or combination of
            conditions of release that will assure that the person
            will not flee or pose a danger to the safety of any
            other person or the community; or

            (B) the person is unlikely to abide by any condition or
            combination of conditions of release.


18 U.S.C. § 3148(b).



     Here, as noted above, the Magistrate Judge found probable

cause to believe that defendant had committed a Federal, State,

or local crime while on release (i.e., the possession and use of

cocaine).   That finding gave rise to the rebuttable presumption

that no condition or combination of conditions will assure that

defendant will not pose a danger to the safety of any other


                                    2
        Case 1:10-cr-00088-SM Document 47 Filed 08/12/10 Page 3 of 3



person or the community.      18 U.S.C. § 3148(b).      Additionally, the

Magistrate Judge found that the defendant is unlikely to abide by

any condition or combination of conditions of release.



      Having considered the pleadings filed and the record de

novo, I find that nothing presented, or appearing in the record,

serves to rebut the presumption in favor of detention.           Defendant

was released on conditions and promptly violated those conditions

in several ways, including the likely commission of drug

felonies.    The Magistrate Judge’s revocation order is supported

by the record and is entirely consistent with the provisions of

applicable law.     Defendant’s current protestations that if

released again she will comply are simply not enough to rebut the

presumption favoring revocation of her release on bail.



      The motion to revoke the detention order (document no. 38)

is denied.


      SO ORDERED.


                                   ____________________________
                                   Steven J. McAuliffe
                                   Chief Judge

August 12, 2010

cc:   Clyde R. W. Garrigan, AUSA
      Richard H. Hubbard, Esq.
      U.S. Probation
      U.S. Marshal

                                     3
