      Case 1:05-cr-00142-SM Document 132 Filed 07/29/10 Page 1 of 3




                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE


United States of America

     v.                                Criminal No. 05-cr-142-01-SM

Donald McMullin


                               O R D E R


     On today’s date, defendant appeared for a “probable cause”

hearing under Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1 on an alleged violation of

conditions of supervision.

     The petition charges that defendant violated Standard

Condition no. 3 requiring that “the defendant shall answer

truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the

instructions of the probation officer.”       Specifically, the

petition alleges that defendant failed to follow Probation

Officer James Bernier’s instruction when, on July 22, 2010,

defendant left the State of Massachusetts and traveled to the

Ossipee New Hampshire District Court, contrary to the specific

instruction (communicated to defendant by Mr. Bernier on July 19,

2010) that defendant not leave the State of Massachusetts without

Mr. Bernier’s prior express permission.

     Probation Officer James Bernier testified at the hearing

that he gave Mr. McMullin specific instructions on July 19, 2010,

to obtain his prior express permission before leaving the State


                                   1
      Case 1:05-cr-00142-SM Document 132 Filed 07/29/10 Page 2 of 3




of Massachusetts.   During Mr. Bernier’s conversation with Mr.

McMullin on July 19, 2010, Mr. McMullin challenged Mr. Bernier’s

authority to place that condition on him.       Mr. Bernier explained

to Mr. McMullin that the source of his authority was Standard

Condition no. 3 which required Mr. McMullin to follow his

instructions.   Mr. McMullin did not agree with Mr. Bernier’s

explanation.    On July 22, 2010, Mr. Bernier learned from a member

of the Wakefield, New Hampshire, Police Department, that Mr.

McMullin had traveled to Ossipee District Court to seek a

modification of his bail conditions in that court.         Mr. McMullin

did not seek Mr. Bernier’s prior permission before traveling to

Ossipee District Court.    The evidence showed that Mr. McMullin’s

decision to travel to Ossipee without obtaining Mr. Bernier’s

prior permission was an act of defiance rather than some sort of

misunderstanding about either Mr. Bernier’s instructions or the

conditions of his supervision.     Indeed, in a conversation with

Mr. McMullin on today’s date and shortly before the hearing, Mr.

McMullin expressly stated to Mr. Bernier that he had no intention

of abiding by the rules of supervised release.

     Having weighed the evidence, and for the reasons stated on

the record, I find probable cause that Mr. McMullin has violated

Standard Condition no. 3 as charged in the Petition.

     Defendant sought bail conditions under Rule 32.1(a)(6).

Under Rule 32.1(a)(6) defendant bears the burden of establishing


                                   2
         Case 1:05-cr-00142-SM Document 132 Filed 07/29/10 Page 3 of 3




by clear and convincing evidence that he will not flee and that

he poses no danger to any other person or to the community.

Based on the evidence presented at the hearing and for the

reasons stated on the record, I find the defendant has failed to

meet this burden and that there are no conditions which are

likely to assure the safety of the community.

        The defendant is committed to the custody of the Attorney

General or his designated representative for confinement in a

corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody

pending appeal.       The defendant shall be afforded a reasonable

opportunity for private consultation with defense counsel.               On

order of a court of the United States or on request of an

attorney for the government, the person in charge of the

corrections facility shall deliver the defendant to the United

States Marshal for the purpose of an appearance in connection

with a court proceeding.

        SO ORDERED.



                                    Landya B. McCafferty
                                    United States Magistrate Judge

Date:    July 29, 2010

cc:   William E. Christie, Esq.
      Debra M. Walsh, Esq.
      U.S. Probation
      U.S. Marshal


                                      3
