          Case 1:08-cr-00010-JD Document 59 Filed 04/29/11 Page 1 of 3




                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                         DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE


United States of America

     v.                                   Criminal No. 08-cr-010-01-JD

Alan G. Garceau


                                  O R D E R


     On April 29, 2011, defendant appeared for a Aprobable cause@

hearing under Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1 on new and additional

violations of conditions of supervision.           Defendant stipulated

to probable cause on the second superseding petition.1             I

therefore find probable cause that defendant has violated the

conditions as charged in the second superseding petition.

     Defendant sought bail conditions under Rule 32.1(a)(6). The

government sought detention.         Under Rule 32.1(a)(6), defendant

bears the burden of establishing by clear and convincing

evidence that he will not flee and that he poses no danger to

any other person or to the community.          Based on the details

contained in Officer Karin T. Kinnan's affidavit dated April 26,


     1
       The court was concerned about defendant's ability to
understand the proceedings, as defendant expressed confusion
when the court queried him about his waiver of his right to a
preliminary hearing. Defense counsel agreed that defendant has
"some issues" but asserted that he considered the defendant
competent for purposes of the proceeding. In view of counsel's
vast experience as a criminal defense lawyer and his history and
familiarity with this particular defendant, the court defers to
his judgment on this question.
         Case 1:08-cr-00010-JD Document 59 Filed 04/29/11 Page 2 of 3




2011, and the proffers of counsel presented at today's hearing,

the court finds that defendant has failed to meet his burden of

persuading the court that he poses no danger to any other person

or to the community.

    Defendant has a persistent history of failing to abide by

orders of the court, and his probation officer, with respect to

abstaining from the consumption of alcohol.          At a bail hearing

on March 1, 2011, defendant argued that his alcohol consumption

was due to his confusion about whether the court had actually

ordered a "no alcohol consumption" condition as part of his

probation.    Although the government thought detention the better

course, it agreed to defendant's release, only if defendant was

released on a "strict leash" and with a "zero tolerance"

approach to any future violation.         The court explained to

defendant that the decision to release him was a "very close

call."    Ultimately, at that hearing, the court released

defendant on strict conditions, and with his clear understanding

that he could not consume "any" alcohol, and must abide by all

other conditions of his release.

    At today's hearing, defendant's counsel described defendant

as having an "unshakeable belief" that he can consume alcohol.

The court's decision today to detain defendant is not a close

call.    The court finds that defendant did not meet his burden to



                                      2
        Case 1:08-cr-00010-JD Document 59 Filed 04/29/11 Page 3 of 3




show by clear and convincing evidence that his release, even on

strict conditions, would pose no danger to any other person or

the community.    Accordingly, it is ORDERED that the defendant be

detained pending a final revocation hearing.

      The defendant is committed to the custody of the Attorney

General or his designated representative for confinement in a

corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody

pending appeal.     The defendant shall be afforded a reasonable

opportunity for private consultation with defense counsel.             On

order of a court of the United States or on request of an

attorney for the government, the person in charge of the

corrections facility shall deliver the defendant to the United

States Marshal for the purpose of an appearance in connection

with a court proceeding.

      SO ORDERED.



                                   Landya B. McCafferty
                                   United States Magistrate Judge

Date:   April 29, 2011

cc:   Bjorn Lange, Esq.
      Clyde R.W. Garrigan, Esq.
      U.S. Marshal
      U.S. Probation




                                     3
