   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 1 of 11



                 IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                   FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
 Plaintiff                                    CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC
 vs
 EDWIN TORRES-ROSARIO
 Defendant


                            OPINION AND ORDER

      Before the Court is the Motion for Leave to Withdraw Guilty Plea filed by
defendant Edwin Torres-Rosario (de.e. 77) and the United States’ response in
opposition (d.e. 88).     The record reflects that this case was called for
defendant’s sentencing hearing on August 19, 2014. During defendant’s
allocution, his attorney Assistant Federal Public Defender Carlos Vázquez
suddenly became ill. The sentencing hearing had to be interrupted since Mr.
Vazquez required immediate medical attention. See Minutes of Sentencing
Hearing (d.e. 74).    On September 9, 2014, defendant filed a Motion for
Extension of Time (d.e. 75) in which his attorney explained that, after meeting
with defendant, he had informed that he was “not inclined to proceed with his
sentencing and that discussions had ensued about withdrawing his guilty plea.”
      On September 19, 2014, defendant filed his Motion to Withdraw Guilty
Plea (d.e. 77). At page 2 of that motion, defendant avers that after August 19,
2014 (date of the aborted sentencing hearing) “counsel met with the defendant
and it was learned that the defendant still maintained his innocence in regards
to the § 924(c)(1(A) count.” He also adds that “[i]t is now evident that the
defendant accepted the charges in connection to § 924(c)(1)(A) but remains
steadfast in his assertion that he is not factually guilty.” Additionally, at page 2
of this Motion he “denies ever conducting drug transactions outside his
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 2 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                              2

residence, as described in the affidavit,1 much less in plain view of others,
notwithstanding, he admitted that he would package the controlled
substance -- marihuana -- at his house, for later sale at his work.” He states
at page 3 of the Motion that “it cannot be said that defendant’s claims as it
pertains to the use of his weapons is not a credible assertion of legal
innocence.”
      Defendant was indicted on January 30, 2013 in a two-count Indictment,
to wit: Count One for possession with intent to distribute marihuana and Count
Two for possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime. The
factual allegations of Count Two are that on January 25, 2013 he possessed
a Glock pistol, .40 caliber, described therein, a loaded Glock magazine with
eleven rounds of .40 caliber ammunition, and a .45 caliber Taurus pistol in
furtherance of the drug trafficking offense charged in Count One.                              The
indictment also contained a firearm and ammunition forfeiture allegation.
      The Court has thoroughly reviewed the relevant events and documents.
The first relevant incident is the evidentiary hearing held on his Motion to
Suppress (d.e. 28), supplemented with an unsworn declaration under penalty
of perjury (d.e. 32).          Defendant there declared that the search warrant
supported by the affidavit of a Puerto Rico Police Officer was based on
information that (1) his house was used to store drugs, (2) that pursuant to
such information the officer conducted surveillance of his house on January 22
and 23, 2013, (3) that during the surveillance police officers reportedly saw him
conducting drug transactions on each of those dates around the front of his
house or near a cement fence in front, and (4) that his house was located in a
residential area.         He denied in such statement                 ever conducting drug

     1
         Referring to the Puerto Rico Police Officer’s affidavit in support of the search warrant.
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 3 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                    3

transactions outside of his residence, much less in plain view, as stated in the
officer’s affidavit. No mention of the possession of the weapons seized,
described in Count Two of the Indictment, was made in defendant’s
declaration.
      The Motion to Suppress (d.e. 28) and this supporting statement
essentially attacked the credibility of police officer Fernando Rodríguez-Brevan,
badge number 26027, assigned to the Fajardo Drug and Narcotics Division,
who was the officer who executed the affidavit in support of the search warrant.
Defendant requested an evidentiary hearing in his suppression motion,
claiming that “there were instances of unbelievable assertions and impossible
observations included in the affidavit of agent Rodriguez.” Page 5 of Motion
to Suppress (d.e. 28). At page 7 of the Motion, he averred that after
ATF agents read his Miranda rights at the police station, he was given the
written form, he executed a waiver of rights and subsequently offered
incriminating statements. He stated that these were recorded in an ATF report
of investigation and argued that even though he was not claiming coercion they
should be suppressed as the product of an unconstitutional arrest. The
government filed an Opposition to the Motion to Suppress on September 6,
2013 (d.e. 33) where it set forth a narrative of agent Rodríguez-Brevan’s
surveillance before the issuance of the search warrant on January 24, 2013.
It specifically referred to observations made by agent Rodríguez-Brevan on
January 18, 2013 around 2:00 PM when he drove in an unmarked vehicle to
the residence identified as the location where an individual a/k/a “Edwin” was
storing drugs and possibly a firearm in the sector of Aguas Claras in Ceiba,
Puerto Rico. The opposition also referred to the surveillance conducted and
observations made by agent Rodríguez-Brevan on January 22, 2013 and on
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 4 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                     4

January 23, 2013 when he returned to that same location. These led to the
request for a search warrant, issued on January 24, 2013 and executed on
January 25, 2013 at the Aguas Claras property in Ceiba, Puerto Rico. The
United States also averred, at page 5 of its Opposition, that after defendant
Torres-Rosario was shown the search warrant and read it, agent
Carrión-Ramírez commenced to execute it in his presence and that defendant
informed him, in the master bedroom, that he had a half pound of marihuana
inside the room and a pistol inside the closet. The government then described
the findings by agent Carrion-Ramirez related to seizure of drug paraphernalia
and a .40 caliber Glock pistol, the reading of his Miranda rights, the information
purportedly provided by defendant to agent Carrión-Ramírez regarding a
magazine kept inside a chest, that agent Carrión-Ramírez found a loaded
Glock magazine with 11 rounds of .40 caliber ammunition inside the chest, and
approximately .60 pounds of a green leafy substance which field tested positive
to marihuana on the top shelf of the closet, as indicated by defendant (see
page 6, d.e. 33). The government also points out, at page 6 of its Opposition,
that agent Carrión-Ramírez found a .45 caliber Taurus pistol inside a fanny
pack, that defendant was provided his Miranda rights in Spanish by
ATF SA Jorge Rosado and ATF Task Force officers Ramón de Jesús and
Francisco Martínez, that defendant signed a waiver form and voluntarily
acknowledged that he sold marihuana at the Meliá Hotel where he worked after
some guests asked him where they could buy the substance. Reference is
also made to statements by defendant that he purchased marihuana,
packaged it at his house, about 2.5 grams of marihuana per baggie which he
sold for $20.00. Page 6 of the Opposition also avers that defendant admitted
in his statement that he had been selling marihuana for approximately a year
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 5 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                   5

and had purchased 4 days before his arrest the half pound found by the police
for the sum of $950.00. In addition to this information, the government also
referred in its Opposition to the firearms and to statements by defendant that
he had acquired both firearms in the town of Luquillo, had paid $1,200.00 for
each and that he possessed them for his protection.
      The evidentiary hearing on the motion to suppress was held on
November 20, 2013 before U.S. Magistrate-Judge Bruce J. McGiverin
(see d.e. 36).     A Report and Recommendation was issued by him on
December 17, 2013 (d.e. 49) where he stated that his findings were based on
the credible testimonies of the witnesses heard and the documentary evidence
received at the suppression hearing. The witnesses who testified at the
suppression hearing were Fernando Rodríguez-Brevan, the P.R. Police agent
who conducted the surveillance of defendant’s residence, and defendant
Edwin Torres-Rosario. It is a settled principle that the findings of fact of a
U.S. Magistrate-Judge, based on credibility determinations, must be accepted
by the Court unless a hearing is held before the judge who will then assess the
witness’ credibility.
      The Magistrate-Judge’s Report and Recommendation includes all of the
observations made by agent Rodríguez-Brevan on January 18, 22 and 23,
2013 during the surveillance that he conducted of defendant Torres-Rosario’s
house. The house was described in detail by the police officer as to its
physical characteristics and the white cement wall in front.              The
Magistrate-Judge also admitted photos taken by agent Rodríguez-Brevan of
the house on those dates. The Report and Recommendation contains a
detailed observation of what agent Rodriguez-Brevan testified he saw during
the surveillance dates at that location on January 22 and 23, 2013, as well as
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 6 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                    6

defendant’s testimony denying that he walked out of the house on January 23,
2013 or that he sold marihuana at the carport area on such date. According
to the R&R narrative, Torres testified that he never sold marihuana from his
house or outside in front of his house and that he only sold marihuana at the
hotel where he worked as a luggage porter, the Grand Meliá Hotel in Río
Grande.
      Magistrate-Judge McGiverin, having set forth the testimonies of both
agent Rodríguez-Brevan and defendant Torres, stated: “Here, the case comes
down to one of credibility.” He then evaluated their respective testimonies and
concluded: “At bottom, Torres simply sets up a swearing contest; either he or
Agent Rodriguez is lying. There simply is no basis on which to second-guess
agent Rodriguez’ statements, much less any evidence that shows the affidavit
contains ‘a false statement made knowingly and intentionally or with reckless
disregard of the truth.’ Torres frankly admitted that he sold marihuana at the
hotel where he worked. At the same time, he claims he never sold marihuana
from his residence in Ceiba but he never provides an explanation as to why he
has no problem selling marihuana at his place of work and would never sell
from his house.” R&R, p. 5.
      His final conclusion was: “I find Torres has not met his burden of proving
by preponderance of the evidence that the affidavit contains false or
misleading statements . . . the affidavit and the search warrant are valid . . .
Because I find agent Rodriguez’ affidavit is credible and the search warrant is
valid, Torres’ statements to federal agents after his arrest were not obtained
in violation of his rights. The statements were made after Miranda warnings
were properly administered and, thus, are admissible. The motion to suppress
should be denied.”
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 7 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                   7

     Defendant was granted until January 14, 2014 to file objections to the
Report and Recommendation. On February 19, 2014, the unopposed Report
and Recommendation was approved and adopted and the Motion to Suppress
was denied. It is against this backdrop that defendant proceeded one week
later to file a motion for change of plea on February 26, 2014.
     Defendant’s change of plea hearing was scheduled for March 17, 2014
before U.S. Magistrate-Judge Marcos E. López. On March 17, 2014, the
parties filed their Plea and Forfeiture Agreement (d.e. 62) which included a
Stipulation of Facts. Pursuant to the Plea Agreement, defendant agreed to
plead guilty to both counts of the Indictment. The Stipulation of Facts signed
by defendant on March 17, 2014 included the following admissions:
     (1)   On January 25, 2013, Puerto Rico Police Agents assigned
           to the Fajardo Narcotics Unit, cond ucted a search warrant
           at the Aguas Claras property lot in the municipality of Ceiba,
           Puerto Rico . Agents arrived to the location, knocke d and
           announced their presence. During the search, agents
           identified themselves and notified the occupants of the
           residence, one of them later identified as Edwin
           Torres-Rosario. According to the Agents, the residence is
           a three bedroom house with two bathrooms.
     (2)   Once the residence was secured the Agents asked
           Torres-Rosario to be present during the search. Inside the
           residence, the Agents found: a Glock pistol, .40 caliber,
           model 23, bearing serial num ber HRX073, one Glock
           magazine loaded with eleven (11) rounds of .40 caliber
           ammunition, and a Taurus pistol, .45 caliber, model PT945,
           bearing serial number NWG86890, approximately
           .60 pounds of a green leafy substance that later field tested
           positive to marihuana, numerous baggies of drug
           paraphernalia, two (2) small scales and $3,127 US dollars
           in different denominations.
     (3)   Edwin Torres-Rosario was later transported to the Fajardo
           Narcotics unit. PRPD Agents read Torres-Rosario his
           Miranda warnings again. After understanding and signing
           the form, Torres-Rosario waived his right to remain silent
           and stated that everything found inside the house belonged
           to him.
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 8 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                    8

      (4)   On January 25, 2013 , approximately at 10:50 a.m.,
            ATF Agents read T o r r e s - R o s a rio his Miranda warnings.
            After understanding and signing the form, Torres-Rosario
            waived his right to remain silent and stated that he sells
            marihuana at the Melia Hotel, where he works, he
            purchases the marijuana and packages the same for
            street level sales at his house, and that he packages
            about 2.5 grams of marihuana on each baggie and sells
            them for $20.
      (5)   Furthermore,Torres-Rosario stated that he purchased the
            half pound of marihuana found by the Police four days prior
            to his arrest for $950.00. Torres-Rosario stated that he
            acquired both firearms in the Luquillo area and that he paid
            $1,200 for each one, that he possessed the firearms for his
            protection. Torres-Rosario stated that some of the cash
            found by the Police were from the drugs sales proceeds.
      (6)   For purposes of this Plea and Forfeiture Agreement Edwin
            Torres-Rosario accepts that he possessed the firearms in
            furtherance of a drug trafficking crime for which he may be
            prosecuted in a Court of the United States, that is
            possessing with intent to distri bute less than 250g. of
            marihuana, a Schedule I Controlled Substance.
Plea and Forfeiture Agreement (d.e. 62), pp. 12-13.
      The change of plea hearing was held as scheduled on March 17, 2014.
The transcript of said hearing (d.e. 84) reflects that the Magistrate-Judge first
determined that defendant was competent to plead. The Magistrate-Judge
then ascertained that defendant understood the charges filed against him and
the consequences of pleading guilty to both counts of the indictment.
Defendant was apprised of all the constitutional rights he was waiving by
pleading guilty, which he understood. The Magistrate-Judge also verified that
defendant understood and discussed with his attorney all the terms and
conditions of his plea agreement with the government and that he validated the
authenticity of his signatures in the document.         The Magistrate-Judge
explained to defendant the penalties that he would be facing by pleading guilty
to both counts of the Indictment, which he acknowledged having understood.
Defendant was further explained that his plea agreement contained a waiver
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 9 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                     9

of appeal clause which he also accepted. The government then summarized
the facts that it would have presented at trial to prove both charges, which
mirrored the stipulation of facts included in the Plea Agreement. Defendant
expressly admitted all the facts narrated by the government, and entered a
plea of guilty as to both charges. The Magistrate-Judge found, based on his
Fed. R. Crim. P. 11 colloquy with defendant, that he was fully aware of the
consequences of his guilty plea and the maximum penalties applicable to
Counts I and II of the indictment, that his plea of guilty to both counts had been
made intelligently, knowingly and voluntarily, and that there was a basis in fact
as to every element of the offenses charged. He, thus, favorably recommended
that defendant’s plea of guilty be accepted.
        Defendant’s plea of guilty was accepted by the Court on April 21, 2014
and his sentencing hearing scheduled for July 15, 2014 (d.e. 67).            The
preparation of a Pre-Sentence Report (PSR) was ordered. As part of the
pre-sentence investigation, defendant was interviewed. The PSR relates that
during his interview conducted in the presence of his defense counsel
A.F.P.D. Carlos Vázquez, defendant “accepted responsibility for his actions as
stipulated in the Version of Facts of the Plea Agreement.” PSR (d.e. 68), p. 6,
¶ 17.
        Defendant represents at page 2 of his Motion to Withdraw Plea of Guilty
(d.e. 77) that when he met with his attorney after August 19, 2014 he
“maintained his innocence in regard to the 924(c)(1)(A) count.” He also denies
in the last paragraph of that page that he ever conducted drug transactions
outside his residence as testified by the police officer who conducted the
surveillance of his house. He has not presented an iota of evidence that would
lead the Court to conclude that he was coerced in any manner to sign the
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 10 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                    10

Stipulation of Facts which is attached to his Plea Agreement or that when he
was interviewed by the U.S. Probation Officer, accompanied by his lawyer, and
accepted responsibility for his actions, as stipulated in the version of facts of
the Plea Agreement, he was being untruthful. Instead, he accommodates his
claim of innocence by rehashing the attacks on the P.R. police officer’s
(Rodríguez-Brevan) credibility. For example, by arguing that the police agent
was alone when he conducted the surveillance of his house on January 22
and 23, 2013 and disavowing having conducted drug transactions in front of
his residence, as Rodríguez-Brevan testified during the suppression hearing
before the Magistrate-Judge whose credibility determinations were against the
defendant and for the investigating police officer. Each one of the facts
stipulated (d.e. 62) as part of the Plea Agreement which defendant challenged
during the suppression hearing were later admitted by him, both as to the
possession of the two firearms, a Glock and a Taurus pistol, in furtherance of
a drug trafficking crime (Count Two) and as to the possession of marihuana
which he sold in $20 baggies near his house (Count One). His claim of
innocence, raised after his sentencing hearing was continued due to his
attorney’s medical emergency, is a hollow claim. Contrary to what he alleges
in his motion to withdraw, his blanket assertion of innocence is inconsistent
with his incriminating statements to the arresting officers, with his assertion to
the U.S. Probation Officer during the presentence interview and with the
version of facts which he assured U.S. Magistrate-Judge López he had freely
accepted.
      In sum, there is only one determination that can reasonably be made:
defendant’s plea of guilty was made knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily and
had a factual basis in compliance with the requirements of Fed. R. Crim.
   Case 3:13-cr-00054-CCC Document 91 Filed 12/14/16 Page 11 of 11



CRIMINAL 13-0054CCC                    11

P. 11(b). Accordingly, the Motion for Leave to Withdraw Guilty Plea filed by
defendant Edwin Torres-Rosario (d.e. 77) is DENIED.
      Defendant Torres-Rosario was on bond at the time that his sentencing
hearing began and he remains on bond. His Motion to Withdraw has been
pending due to an unintentional lapse resulting from the sheer volume of
criminal cases and criminal defendants which is a constant reality in this
District. One has to wonder, however, why defendant Torres-Rosario and his
attorney A.F.P.D. Carlos Vázquez never filed a motion requesting disposition
or made a brief call to alert of its pendency.
      The sentencing hearing is set for JANUARY 12, 2017 at 2:00 PM.
      SO ORDERED.
      At San Juan, Puerto Rico, on December 14, 2016.



                                    S/CARMEN CONSUELO CEREZO
                                    United States District Judge
