          Case 1:11-cr-00159-JD Document 75 Filed 02/13/13 Page 1 of 4




                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
                       DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE



United States of America

     v.                                   Criminal No. 11-cr-159-JD

Ulrick Lucien


                                  O R D E R

     Ulrick Lucien was convicted of charges of making a false

statement during the acquisition of a firearm and making a false

statement in required information kept by a firearms dealer in

violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(a)(6) and 924(a)(1)(A).             Before

trial, Lucien moved to exclude certain items of evidence and the

government objected.       On January 30, 2013, the court held a

conference with the parties to discuss the motion.

     The government subsequently moved to clarify the court’s

oral ruling with respect to a case involving Lucien in Lynn

District Court and addresses he provided to court personnel on

various dates.      Lucien moved for an order stating that his

proposed stipulation as to that evidence “accord[ed] with this

Court’s ruling on Defendant’s motion in limine.”            On February 4,

2013, the court held another conference with the parties to

discuss, among other items, their pending motions concerning the

Lynn District Court case.
         Case 1:11-cr-00159-JD Document 75 Filed 02/13/13 Page 2 of 4




     The motions were resolved prior to trial as follows:



A.   Lucien’s Motion to Exclude Evidence

     Lucien moved to exclude the following items of evidence:

“(A) Any facts concerning Mr. Lucien’s prior record, or any prior

contact with police offers or the courts, other than (1) he had a

case in Lynn District Court and (2) the addresses he provided to

court personnel, and the dates on which he provided the

addresses; (B) Any conversation between Agent Kelter and Mr.

Lucien, or any other evidence, concerning money Mr. Lucien owed

to Lynn District Court; (C) Any statement made by Mr. Lucien

concerning what he did with the firearms he purchased; [and] (D)

Any evidence concerning the alleged recovery of one of the

firearms in Boston in May of 2012."1

     Lucien’s motion as it pertains to his prior record ((A)

above) was granted in part and denied in part.           Lucien’s motion

as it pertains to evidence concerning money he owed to Lynn

District Court ((B) above) was granted.          Lucien’s motion as it

pertains to statements he made concerning what he did with the

firearms he purchased ((C) above) was granted in part and denied


     1
      Lucien also filed an addendum to his motion seeking to
exclude evidence concerning Lucien’s traffic stops other than the
addresses he provided during those stops. The parties later
agreed to a stipulation concerning that evidence.

                                      2
          Case 1:11-cr-00159-JD Document 75 Filed 02/13/13 Page 3 of 4




in part.     In its objection to Lucien’s motion, the government

represented that it would not introduce evidence concerning

recovery of one of the firearms at trial.           Because the government

represented that it would not introduce that evidence, the part

of Lucien’s motion that sought to exclude that evidence ((D)

above) was denied as moot.2



B.   Other Motions

     The government moved to clarify the court’s oral ruling

concerning Lucien’s case in Lynn District Court and the addresses

he provided to court personnel ((A) above).           Lucien moved for a

ruling that his proposed stipulation concerning that evidence was

consistent with the court’s previous oral ruling.             On February 4,

2013, the court held a conference in chambers to discuss, among

other things, the parties’ motions.          See Minute Entry for

proceedings held on February 4, 2013.          At the conference, the

parties agreed to the wording of a stipulation concerning that

evidence and filed a stipulation the following day.             See document

no. 69.     Accordingly, because the parties agreed to stipulate to

the facts concerning Lucien’s case in Lynn District Court, the



     2
      The court held a conference in chambers and ruled on
Lucien’s motion orally. See Minute Entry for proceedings held on
January 30, 2013.

                                       3
        Case 1:11-cr-00159-JD Document 75 Filed 02/13/13 Page 4 of 4




addresses he provided to court personnel, and the dates on which

he provided those addresses, the government’s motion to clarify

and Lucien’s motion regarding his proposed stipulation were

rendered moot.



                                Conclusion

      For the foregoing reasons, Lucien’s motion to exclude

evidence (document no. 54) was granted in part and denied in

part.   The government’s motion to clarify (document no. 62) and

Lucien’s motion concerning stipulations (document no. 64) were

denied as moot.



      SO ORDERED.



                                         ____________________________
                                         Joseph A. DiClerico, Jr.
                                         United States District Judge

February 13, 2013

cc:   Nick Abramson, Esquire
      Behzad Mirhashem, Esquire
      Debra M. Walsh, Esquire




                                     4
