      Case 1:09-cr-00093-JL Document 116 Filed 08/05/13 Page 1 of 2




                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                     DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE


United States of America

     v.                                Criminal No. 09-cr-093-02-JL

Annmarie Clement


                              O R D E R

     On August 5, 2013, the defendant appeared for a detention

hearing pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1(a)(6).         Under Rule

32.1(a)(6), the defendant bears the burden of establishing by

clear and convincing evidence that she will not flee and that she

poses no danger to any other person or to the community.

     Based on the proffers presented at the hearing, and for the

reasons more fully stated on the record, the court finds the

defendant has failed to meet this burden and that there are no

conditions that are likely to assure the safety of the community.

In fact, taking a comprehensive review of the entirety of her

conduct while on both pre- and post-conviction supervision, the

court finds that the defendant is unlikely to abide by any

conditions or combination of conditions it may set. Specifically,

over the past number of years the defendant has twice been

terminated from Hampshire House, most recently testing for

morphine within eight (8) days of her entry into the program and

testing positive for oxycodone on the day of her release from the
       Case 1:09-cr-00093-JL Document 116 Filed 08/05/13 Page 2 of 2




program, and has repeatedly continued her drug use while under

supervision.   The court will recommend, however, the defendant

for entry into the Strafford House of Corrections TC Program.

      Accordingly, it is ORDERED that the defendant be detained

pending a final revocation hearing.

      The defendant is committed to the custody of the Attorney

General or his designated representative for confinement in a

corrections facility separate, to the extent practicable, from

persons awaiting or serving sentences or being held in custody

pending appeal.     The defendant shall be afforded a reasonable

opportunity for private consultation with defense counsel.             On

order of a court of the United States or on request of an

attorney for the government, the person in charge of the

corrections facility shall deliver the defendant to the United

States Marshal for the purpose of an appearance in connection

with a court proceeding.

      SO ORDERED.


                                  /s/ Daniel J. Lynch
                                  Daniel J. Lynch
                                  United States Magistrate Judge

Date: August 5, 2013

cc:    Counsel of Record
       U.S. Marshal
       U.S. Probation




                                    2
