Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 1 of 11         PageID #: 1467




                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MAINE

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                )
                                          )
 v.                                       ) Docket No. 2:16-cr-00036-NT
                                          )
 THEODORE SEALY,                          )
                                          )
                    Defendant.            )
                                          )
                                          )

          ORDER ON MOTION FOR COMPASSIONATE RELEASE

      Before me is Defendant Theodore Sealy’s motion for compassionate release

(“Def.’s Mot.”) (ECF No. 187), which the Government opposes (“Gov’t’s Opp’n”)

(ECF No. 192). For the reasons stated below, the Defendant’s motion is DENIED.


                         PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

      On August 3, 2016, Mr. Sealy pleaded guilty to Count One of the Superseding

Indictment, conspiracy to distribute and possess with the intent to distribute cocaine

base, oxycodone, and heroin, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1) and 846.

Superseding Indictment (ECF No. 55); Minute Entry (ECF No. 70). On March 6, 2017,

I sentenced him to eighty-four months imprisonment, followed by five years of

supervised release. Judgment (ECF No. 159).

      Mr. Sealy served the first half of his sentence in prison before being moved by

the Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”) to home confinement on October 28, 2020, due to his

medical conditions and the increased risk of COVID-19 in an institutional setting.

Def.’s Mot. 1. He now seeks to have his sentence reduced and to be released from

home confinement.
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 2 of 11                         PageID #: 1468




                                            ANALYSIS

        Congress enacted the compassionate release statute1 to allow district courts to

modify sentences of imprisonment, as relevant here, upon finding that:

(1) extraordinary and compelling reasons warrant modification, (2) the modification

accords with the § 3553(a) sentencing factors, and (3) the modification is consistent

with “applicable policy statements” of the Sentencing Guidelines. I begin with the

question of whether there exist extraordinary and compelling reasons warranting Mr.

Sealy’s release.

        The compassionate release statute itself does not define what constitutes an

“extraordinary and compelling reason[ ]” justifying a sentence modification. United

States v. Canales-Ramos, 19 F.4th 561, 566 (1st Cir. 2021); see 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c).

However, the United States Sentencing Commission has done so in the Commentary



1       Title 18, United States Code, Section 3582(c)(1)(A) governs “[m]odification of an imposed term
of imprisonment.” Prior to the passage of the First Step Act of 2018, only the Director of the Bureau of
Prisons (“BOP”) could move for modification of a sentence. See United States v. Brooker, 976 F.3d 228,
231 (2d Cir. 2020). In December of 2018, Congress amended § 3582(c) to allow inmates to seek a
modification of an imposed term of imprisonment from the courts directly. See First Step Act of 2018,
Pub. L. No. 115-391, § 603(b), 132 Stat. 5194, 5239 (codified at 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A)). Section 3582
now provides that:

        The court may not modify a term of imprisonment once it has been imposed except
        that—(1) in any case—(A) the court, upon motion of the Director of the Bureau of
        Prisons, or upon motion of the defendant after the defendant has fully exhausted all
        administrative rights to appeal a failure of the Bureau of Prisons to bring a motion on
        the defendant’s behalf or the lapse of 30 days from the receipt of such a request by the
        warden of the defendant’s facility, whichever is earlier, may reduce the term of
        imprisonment (and may impose a term of probation or supervised release with or
        without conditions that does not exceed the unserved portion of the original term of
        imprisonment), after considering the factors set forth in section 3553(a) to the extent
        that they are applicable, if it finds that—(i) extraordinary and compelling reasons
        warrant such a reduction . . . and that such a reduction is consistent with applicable
        policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission . . . .

18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A).



                                                   2
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 3 of 11            PageID #: 1469




to its policy statement on compassionate release, located at § 1B1.13 of the sentencing

guidelines. In discussing medical-based reasons, the Commission notes that

extraordinary and compelling reasons exist where:

             (i)    The defendant is suffering from a terminal illness (i.e., a
                    serious and advanced illness with an end of life trajectory).
                    A specific prognosis of life expectancy (i.e., a probability of
                    death within a specific time period) is not required.
                    Examples include metastatic solid-tumor cancer,
                    amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), end-stage organ
                    disease, and advanced dementia.

             (ii)   The defendant is —

                    (I)     suffering from a serious physical or medical
                            condition,
                    (II)    suffering from a serious functional or cognitive
                            impairment, or
                    (III)   experiencing deteriorating physical or mental
                            health because of the aging process,

                    that substantially diminishes the ability of the defendant
                    to provide self-care within the environment of a
                    correctional facility and from which he or she is not
                    expected to recover.
             ….

Id. § 1B1.13 Commentary n.1. The Commentary addresses age-based and family-

based reasons in subdivisions (B) and (C), and then provides in subdivision (D):

“Other Reasons.—As determined by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, there

exists in the defendant’s case an extraordinary and compelling reason other than, or

in combination with, the reasons described in subdivisions (A) through (C).” Id.

      The Defendant does not argue that subdivision (A), (B), or (C) applies, instead

arguing that he has “other” extraordinary and compelling reasons that warrant the

application of subdivision (D). By its terms, subdivision (D) only allows the Director



                                           3
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 4 of 11                      PageID #: 1470




of the BOP to consider whether “other” extraordinary and compelling reasons exist.

However, this limitation predates Congress’s enactment of the First Step Act, which

granted incarcerated individuals the right to file motions for compassionate release

in the event that the BOP declined or delayed doing so.2 United States v. Saccoccia,

10 F.4th 1, 3–4, 7 (1st Cir. 2021). Because the Sentencing Commission has lacked a

quorum for the last several years, it has not yet had the opportunity to consider how

the implementation of the First Step Act might affect its policy guidance in § 1B1.13.

Id. at 7. The First Circuit has previously noted that, because § 1B1.13 is so outdated,

an “overwhelming majority of the courts of appeals that have passed on the issue”

have concluded that § 1B1.13’s guidance is not currently binding. Id. at 8. And while

the First Circuit has not yet decided the issue, id., I have previously determined “that

§ 1B1.13 does not control where a compassionate release motion is filed” directly by

a defendant, United States v. Millette, Docket No. 2:16-cr-00004-NT, 2020 WL

7502454, at *6 (Dec. 21, 2020 D. Me.). I have also decided that although it is not

binding, § 1B1.13 “still provides helpful guidance on how to analyze compassionate

release requests. Id.3


2      In order to give the BOP the opportunity to act in the first instance, a defendant must first
appeal to the Director of the BOP for release prior to filing a motion. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A). The
Government does not dispute that Mr. Sealy has done so and has thus satisfied this exhaustion
requirement. Gov’t’s Obj. to Def.’s Mot. for Compassionate Release (“Gov’t’s Opp’n”) 4 n.5 (ECF No.
192).
3       Although I conducted this analysis in the context of whether a sentence reduction was
consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Commission, I see no reason
why my analysis should not apply equally to an evaluation of whether extraordinary and compelling
reasons exist. The point remains that the Sentencing Commission has not yet had the ability to
consider how compassionate release motions should be evaluated when they are filed by a defendant
rather than by the BOP. As a result, I do not consider myself bound by the Sentencing Commission’s
policy statement with regard to any part of the compassionate release analysis.



                                                  4
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 5 of 11        PageID #: 1471




      The Defendant asserts that his need for proper and timely medical care,

combined with his increased susceptibility to complications from a COVID-19

infection, constitutes an extraordinary and compelling reason justifying a reduction

in his sentence. And because § 1B1.13 is not binding, I am free to consider whether

this asserted reason is in fact “extraordinary and compelling.”

      To make this assessment, I consider the plain meaning of the words

“extraordinary” and “compelling.” Canales-Ramos, 19 F.4th at 566. A reason is

“extraordinary” if it “is beyond the mine-run either in fact or in degree.” Id.

Meanwhile, a “compelling” reason is one “that is both powerful and convincing.” Id.

at 567. The Defendant primarily relies on his medical conditions and need for

treatment as a justification for his sentence reduction. “[B]ut not every complex of

health concerns is sufficient to warrant compassionate release. This remains true

even in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.” Saccoccia, 10 F.4th at 5. It is only if

“the defendant’s situation constitutes the type of ‘extreme hardship’ that the

compassionate-release statute is designed to ameliorate” that a sentence reduction is

warranted. Id. at 4.

      The Defendant’s request for relief relies on three premises: 1) he has a number

of serious medical conditions, 2) he has been unable to treat fully those medical

conditions while on home confinement, and 3) he is at significantly higher risk of

illness or death from COVID-19 because of his health conditions and because he is

unvaccinated. The Government does not challenge the first point. Indeed, it seems

that the Defendant’s various medical conditions are the reason why he was released




                                          5
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 6 of 11                         PageID #: 1472




from BOP custody to home confinement in October 2020. Def.’s Mot. 1, 20–21; Gov’t’s

Opp’n 4 n.5. I also assume that the third premise is true.4 But, as he appears to

acknowledge, because Mr. Sealy is on home confinement, it is not enough for him to

argue that he has serious medical conditions and is at heightened risk of an adverse

outcome were he to contract COVID-19. The Defendant emphasizes that various

district courts across the country have reduced a number of defendants’ sentences in

order to mitigate the risks of the spread of COVID-19 in the prison environment.

Def.’s Mot. 18–19 (citing cases). But that risk is not present here. Mr. Sealy is already

at home. He is not in a carceral environment where he would be unable to mitigate

his risk of infection. And while he emphasizes that the BOP already found

extraordinary and compelling reasons for his release from prison, Def.’s Mot. 20, he

fails to acknowledge that those reasons do not necessarily justify a release from home

confinement, which does not carry the same health risks as a carceral sentence.5




4       The Government criticizes Mr. Sealy’s unvaccinated status and points out that he initially
provided no explanation for why he is not vaccinated and that he should not be rewarded for failing to
take this significant step to mitigate his risk. Gov’t’s Opp’n 5. In response, the Defendant says that his
doctors have advised him not to get vaccinated until they determine what autoimmune disease he is
suffering from. Def.’s Reply 5 (ECF No. 194). I am skeptical about this explanation. The Defendant
never asserts that he intends to get vaccinated, nor does he support his contentions with any medical
authorities—whether from his doctors or from some other source—that someone with an autoimmune
disease (even if undetermined) should not get vaccinated. But in any event, because Mr. Sealy is not
currently incarcerated, I do not see the relevance of his risk of severe consequences from COVID-19.
5        Nor am I persuaded by the idea that Mr. Sealy might be forced to return to prison. In support
of this concern, he cites to a New York Times article from July 2021. Def.’s Mot. 11–12. The information
on which he relies is not only outdated, see Katie Benner, Zolan Kanno-Youngs & Charlie Savage,
Some Inmates Can Stay Confined at Home After Covid Emergency, Justice Dept. Says, N.Y. Times
(Dec. 21, 2021), https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/21/us/politics/prison-covid-home-confinement.html,
but, as the Government points out, this concern is a speculative one. The Defendant has pointed to no
evidence that he might be ordered to return to prison, and on the off-chance he were, he could seek
relief from this Court at that point in time.



                                                    6
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 7 of 11          PageID #: 1473




      What the Defendant’s motion boils down to is that he says he is not able to

adequately treat his medical conditions while on home confinement because of the

strictures of supervision that that punishment entails. Def.’s Mot. 1–3; First Decl. of

Theodore Sealy (“First Sealy Decl.”) 1–2 (ECF No. 187-1). Specifically, Mr. Sealy

identifies two ways in which he says his supervision on home confinement interferes

with his ability to treat his medical conditions. The first is the requirement that he

receive advance approval for medical appointments and procedures, which he says

does not allow him to be put on wait lists for specialist appointments and procedures.

First Sealy Decl. 1. Mr. Sealy emphasizes that medical specialists tend to be booked

months in advance and that canceled appointments sometimes allow for speedier

care. First Sealy Decl. 1. He also describes how follow-up appointments must

sometimes be scheduled on short notice (e.g., a biopsy that he was trying to schedule

in December 2020). Def.’s Reply 4 (ECF No. 194). However, Mr. Sealy says he has

been told by his supervision officers that BOP approval for medical procedures and

appointments takes at least one week. First Sealy Decl. 1. As a result, he has been

unable to schedule appointments on short notice, which has delayed the diagnosis

and treatment of his ongoing health issues. First Sealy Decl. 1–2. The second

purported issue that Mr. Sealy identifies is one he relays through an anecdote about

an earlier trip to the emergency room, where his supervision officer required him to

call an ambulance rather than let his wife drive him. First Sealy Decl. 1. The problem

that arose there was that that ambulance took him to an out-of-network hospital




                                          7
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 8 of 11                     PageID #: 1474




where his treatment was not fully covered by his health insurance. First Sealy Decl.

1.

       While the first issue merits discussion, I dismiss the second out of hand. It is

neither extraordinary nor compelling that a collateral consequence of home

confinement is that Mr. Sealy cannot choose which hospital he is treated at in an

emergency and that he might have to be treated at a hospital that does not accept his

insurance.

       As to the issue with scheduling appointments, this is a serious concern. It may

be that in some cases an inability to schedule important medical appointments could

be an extraordinary and compelling reason warranting a sentencing modification.

But there is no such extraordinary and compelling reason in this case because Mr.

Sealy’s contentions are not supported by the facts.

       In his initial motion, Mr. Sealy did not support his assertions about his

inability to promptly schedule medical treatment with anything beyond his own

statements.6 But he surmised that his supervising officer, Jessica Ortiz, “would be

happy to confirm” what he was saying. First Sealy Decl. 2.

       That has proven to be incorrect. The Government has provided an email from

Ms. Ortiz in which she outlines the procedure for last-minute requests for medical



6       Although he attached medical records to his motion, he did not identify any aspect of these
records supporting his contention that he was unable to schedule medical appointments on short
notice—only that his medical appointments were not scheduled on short notice (without any apparent
reason). These medical records are also entirely unhelpful. They are 416 pages, and the Defendant
points to no page or pages as being particularly important. They are not in chronological order. And,
as the Government points out, almost all of them appear to be from when Mr. Sealy was incarcerated
rather than relating to recent treatment. Gov’t’s Opp’n 7 n.6.



                                                 8
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 9 of 11          PageID #: 1475




appointments. According to Ms. Ortiz, when Mr. Sealy requests a medical

appointment, she must submit the request through a BOP computer system. Email

from Jessica Ortiz (“Ortiz Email”) (ECF No. 193). When she does so, she has the

option to mark a request as urgent if the request is for a last-minute (even same day)

appointment. Ortiz Email. Ms. Ortiz notes that urgent requests are reviewed as soon

as possible, and she can also contact her supervisor to escalate the review of such a

request. Ortiz Email. Ms. Ortiz also states that she is unaware of any resident ever

having been denied the ability to attend a medical appointment or of any appointment

request failing to be processed. Ortiz Email.

      In response, Mr. Sealy contends that this policy was never communicated to

him and that he was previously told that he had to submit requests for appointments

a week in advance. Def.’s Reply 4–5. He also states that he specifically asked to

schedule a next-day biopsy in December 2020 and was told that that was not

permitted. Def.’s Reply 4. In addition to his own attestations, Mr. Sealy points to the

rules of supervision that he was given, which request that medical appointments be

scheduled a week in advance and that medical procedures be scheduled two weeks in

advance. Rules of Supervision 3–4 (ECF No. 194-3).

      I recognize that the rules of supervision that Mr. Sealy points to say that

medical appointments should be scheduled a week in advance and that medical

procedures should be scheduled two weeks in advance. But it sounds from these rules

like it is requested that appointments and procedures be scheduled within this time




                                          9
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 10 of 11            PageID #: 1476




 frame, not that they are required to be. Nor do these rules say anything about urgent

 appointments and whether the rules might be different for such appointments.

       It may be the case that the procedure for scheduling urgent appointments was

 not previously communicated to Mr. Sealy. And it may be the case that there were

 earlier miscommunications about scheduling such appointments that prevented Mr.

 Sealy from being able to schedule some medical appointments in the past. But I do

 not see how these earlier mishaps could constitute an extraordinary and compelling

 reason justifying his release from home confinement. It makes sense that Mr. Sealy

 might need to be released from home confinement if it were necessary to

 accommodate his future treatment. But it does not make sense that he would need to

 be released in order to rectify what may have been earlier mistakes involving his

 supervision.

       Regardless of what was communicated to Mr. Sealy in the past, it should be

 very clear to him now not only that he is able to schedule last-minute appointments,

 but what the procedure is for doing so. And to the extent that Mr. Sealy has future

 difficulties scheduling such appointments, he now has written statements from the

 Government telling him that not only is it permissible to schedule last-minute

 appointments, but his supervising officer is unaware of any inmate being

 unsuccessful in scheduling one. Given all of this, Mr. Sealy’s basis for his motion (that

 he is unable to schedule last-minute appointments) not only does not appear to be

 extraordinary or compelling, but it appears to be illusory. As a result, because it

 appears that Mr. Sealy should be able to work with his supervising officer to schedule




                                            10
Case 2:16-cr-00036-NT Document 195 Filed 02/08/22 Page 11 of 11        PageID #: 1477




 any necessary medical treatment in the future, he has not established an

 extraordinary and compelling reason justifying his release from home confinement.


                                  CONCLUSION

       For the foregoing reasons, the Defendant’s motion for compassionate release is

 DENIED.



 SO ORDERED.

                                                    /s/ Nancy Torresen
                                                    United States District Judge

 Dated: February 8, 2022




                                         11
