Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 1 of 10                         PageID #: 137




                               UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                    DISTRICT OF MAINE
   United States of America

   v.                                                   Criminal No: 1:21-cr-00078-LEW

   David Phillips
                                  Defense sentencing memorandum


        Like a large portion of the population, David Phillips was swept up in a fervor of politically

motivated misinformation about the impending apocalypse which would inevitably befall our great

nation if Donald Trump were removed from office. A carefully calculated campaign of deception,

often perpetrated by officials in our own government, tricked David and others into believing that

our potical system had failed, and that he had to isolate and arm himself to prepare for disaster.

David fell in with a group of conspiracy theorist and doomsday prepper types known as the

Boogaloo boys. He became close with their charismatic leader, a man named Michael Dunn. In the

political fervor surrounding the end of the Trump presidency he ended up traveling with Michael

Dunn to his remote tract of land in Greenbush, Maine. He obtained weapons and ammunition to be

stored at that location believing that they would be needed once society devolved into madness.

This was, of course, its own form of madness and it's how the owner of a successful paving

company from Connecticut came to find himself illegally purchasing ammunition from a military

supply store in rural Maine.

        David has been in custody since turning himself in on a warrant for his arrest in February

2021. He has had time to fundamentally reconsider his beliefs and recognizes today how deranged

he had truly become before his arrest. David has now rejected the ideology that led him down this

path of criminal activity. He has done everything he can to part ways with those involved in similar

                                                   1
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 2 of 10                         PageID #: 138




misdeeds. During his incarceration, he has taken advantage of whatever educational opportunities he

can. Given COVID-19, these have been extremely limited. David has therefore created his own

community including a support and Bible study group in the pod where he is housed. We have

submitted a number of letters from individuals in the pod who have participated in this group and

speak highly of David as a leader and mentor.

       This court now must determine what sentence to impose on David Phillips. We anticipate

that the aggregate offense level will end up being 13 with a criminal history category of III. The

advisory guideline sentencing range will therefore be 18 to 24 months. David has been in custody

now for approximately eight months. He served that time under extremely difficult circumstances

enduring repeated outbreaks of COVID-19 in the jail and suffering his own infection with the virus.

We ask that the Court now to impose a term of imprisonment equal to time served so that David

can be released on to supervised release and re-integrate with his community and his family.

                         Guideline Factors Support a Reduced Sentence

       The United States Sentencing Guidelines recognize a number of factors that may justify a

downward departure in an individual defendant’s sentence and many of those factors counsel in

favor of reducing Brittany’s sentence.

                       USSG § 5H1 Factors. Specific Offender Characteristics:

§ 5H1.3 Mental and Emotional Conditions.

       Is worth considering the defendants history and upbringing as it impacts his mental and

emotional condition today. As probation notes, David's youth was marked by abuse at the hands of

his mother who was ultimately arrested for assaulting her. His physical abuse at the hands of his

mother lead to his removal from the home and placement in foster care. David’s time in foster care

was marked by more abuse and mistreatment. Who is father was available to care for David but the

                                                   2
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 3 of 10                          PageID #: 139




child welfare service would not place, David with his father because he tested positive for marijuana

during drug screenings. Instead David was subjected to abuse and neglect at the hands of people he

didn't know. At the age of 13, David was reunited with his father but the damage of his mother’s

abuse the foster care system were already done. He found himself in the juvenile justice system and

was placed in a correctional school. There, he was subject to further physical abuse which ultimately

led his father to fight to get him out of the program. He reunited and lived successfully and his

father through his teenage years. The two became very close and, eventually, ended up working

together in the oil extraction industry in Texas. In 2017, David's father disappeared and has never

been heard from again. The circumstances suggest, that his father has been murdered but this has

never been proved. His father’s sudden and unexpected departure have been extremely difficult for

David. His father is the only parental figure that ever showed him real love and he is the man who

rescued David from abusive situations with his mother, the foster care system, and the juvenile

correction system. David felt lost without his father it is likely this emotional trauma that led him to

seek support and connection with more questionable groups, eventually leading him to the

Boogaloo Boys.

§5H1.5. Employment Record

        David has an impressive record of employment. He has always been a productive worker

and, until his arrest, he operated his own paving company. He was quite successful in his business

employing a crew of hard-working men who put in long hours and did good during the paving

season. He was hired by large businesses and municipalities to to jobs that were too difficult or

complicated for other crews. He has a history of employment in the oil industry, construction and

carpentry. He will be readily employable when he is released and he hopes to restart his business

once he's able to raise the money to repair or repurchase equipment and to hire his crew back on.

                                                   3
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 4 of 10                             PageID #: 140




§5H1.6. Family Ties and Responsibilities

        David is the father to two young boys. There is currently a child welfare case pending in the

Connecticut Court where David is represented by attorney Douglas Monaghan of Groton

Connecticut. David remains in a relationship with the mother of the children. She used drugs during

her first pregnancy and out of concerns for his child’s safety, David reported this to medical

professionals. This led to child welfare's intervention and the removal of the first and then second

child from the couple’s home. The mother is in the process of reunification and is making

commendable progress. But in David’s case, we understand that the court must soon determine

whether parental rights will be terminated. Given his continued incarceration, David has been

unable to participate in reunification efforts for nearly the entirety of 2021. We understand from

Connecticut counsel that, if David continues to be incarcerated for a substantial period of time, his

parental rights will likely be terminated at a hearing likely to be held in the first part of 2022.

§5H1.8. Criminal History

        David has a criminal history score of 4 and his record consists of 7 events counted for 1

point each. It is worth noting that two of those points relate to convictions for "failure to appear"

which were charged when David missed court dates on other charges. Under Connecticut law it

appears common to charge this misdemeanor failure to appear crime when a defendant misses a

court date. Under Maine law, a person would not normally be charged with a new crime for missing

court but would simply have a warrant for arrest authorized. More commonly these days, a Maine

defendant would simply be notified of a new court date and the matter rescheduled. An additional

history point is assessed against David for shoplifting a single power bar from a Walgreens. He also

has a one point conviction for possession of a controlled substance, marijuana from 2020. Frankly,

counsel was surprised to see that possession of marijuana was still a criminal offense in Connecticut

                                                     4
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 5 of 10                          PageID #: 141




in 2020. In Maine and a growing number of jurisdictions this would not constitute any crime at all.

While, the criminal history score is accurately calculated it is worth considering that the score

represents criminal convictions for offenses that would not constitute crimes in Maine, and for an

extremely low level shoplifting offense involving a single power bar. If these convictions were

removed from David's criminal record he would have three points resulting in a criminal history

category of II and a guideline range of 15 to 21 months.



      18 U.S.C. §3553(a) A Sentence that is Sufficient but not Greater Than Necessary:

        Federal law requires this court to impose a sentence that is sufficient but not greater than

necessary to serve the purposes listed in §3553(a)(2). Those are: (A) to reflect the seriousness of the

offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense; (B) to

afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct; (C) to protect the public from further crimes of the

defendant; and (D) to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical

care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.

      §3553(a)(2) The proposed sentence is sufficient but not greater than necessary to:

(A) Reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just

    punishment for the offense: The conduct here is serious and deserves significant punishment.

    But we must consider the circumstances of the offense. This particular conduct was an

    outgrowth of a very strange time in America's political history. David felt an irrational need to

    protect himself by obtaining guns and ammunition in some misguided belief that political order

    was soon to crumble and that every man had to fend for himself. In retrospect, this is a

    ridiculous notion but it is one that was egged on by political elites and a community of like-

    minded individuals who were all too receptive to the message broadcast by those in charge.

                                                    5
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 6 of 10                          PageID #: 142




    While David’s actions were reprehensible, we need to understand them as a response to a

    particular situation. Like many others, he honestly believed that the fabric of civil society was

    soon to disintegrate. He has now gained an understanding that these beliefs were wrong and that

    he was diluted into believing lies.

(B) Provide adequate deterrence to criminal conduct: The proposed sentence will have a deterrent

    effect and that is important. David has some past runs with the law he has never actually served

    any period of incarceration beyond a handful of days after low level arrests. These past 10

    months in custody have been quite difficult but David has taken his situation very seriously and

    has committed himself to ensuring that he will never again be in the position to find himself

    locked up. To the extent a custodial sentence will have a deterrent effect we submit that that

    effect is already fully realized for Mr. Phillips.

(C) Protect the public from further crimes of the defendant : Certainly, the months of incarceration

    have prevented David from harming the public with further criminal activity. There is a

    substantial danger to the public posed by groups of armed people, deluded by deranged political

    ideologies, arming themselves in an attempt to prevent a hostile takeover of America's

    democracy. While locking these people up will prevent them from harming the public, the more

    effective and more lasting public protection will come from re-educating these people, and from

    their own realization that their past believes were wrong. To the extend the criminal justice

    system can help in that endeavor, that help is much more likely to come in the form of

    supervision through probation and through pro social interaction with a supportive and

    productive community. With the help of probation, David will have those supports in place.

(D) Provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other

    correctional treatment in the most effective manner : The most effective way to provide for

                                                         6
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 7 of 10                        PageID #: 143




    David’s continued vocational progress, medical care and substance abuse treatment is to allow

    him to be in the community. There, he can take advantage of the supports offered by his family,

    friends, coworkers and probation. As the court is aware David has suffered COVID-19

    infection while in custody and he has also suffered a serious skin infection. These are diseases

    that are More readily transmissible and more seriously harmful to those incarcerated than they

    are to the public at large. Continued incarceration will continue to jeopardize David’s health and

    welfare. Incarceration prevents him from being employed or receiving training or education in

    any effective manner. David has always been a productive member of society. He can resume

    that productivity once he is released and there is no compelling reason to delay that release any

    longer.

                         COVID-19 and the Conditions of Incarceration

       It is clear now that vaccines, while tremendously important, have not stoped the COVID-19

pandemic. Even as we make progress against the virus, it will take years for the prison system to re-

cover if it ever does. Obviously, the congregation of a large number of people in a confined space

has the potential to increase the transmission of the virus and the potential to cause serious harm or

even death to those incarcerated. But even more than that, as prisons have become more dangerous

places to be locked up, they've also become more dangerous and less desirable places to work. Fed-

eral Prisons nationwide have lost tremendous numbers of staff and rehabilitative programs that were

shut down during at the height of the pandemic may not have sufficient staffing or resources to re-

open if and when conditions improve. These are the programs that might offer some modicum of

training, education, treatment and counseling for defendants serving Federal time. These are the

programs that make a prison sentence bearable and may make it less of a waste of someone's life. It

is my understanding that RDAP programs, educational programs and residential reentry centers are

                                                  7
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 8 of 10                             PageID #: 144




still not fully operational throughout the federal prison system. As NBC news has reported1 staffing

shortages throughout the federal prison system have led to inmates being locked down over the

weekends when staff is less available. Prisoner suicide and homicide rates are up. While the Federal

Bureau of prisons budgets for something like 20,400 correctional officers across its facilities, they

have staffed only about 13,700 of those positions. To the extent that a federal prison sentence once

had the potential to be some kind of rehabilitative experience, that appears to be a complete fiction

at this particular moment in history.

        David has spend much of his pretrial detention in 23 hour a day lockdown, either isolated

from other inmates who tested positive for COVID-19 or being isolated himself during the times

when he was sick with the virus. Today, jail or prison is not just an unpleasant place to spend time, it

is a place that is life threateningly dangerous to the health and welfare of those inside. Facilities such

as the Cumberland County Jail have suffered repeated outbreaks of COVID-19. Staff vaccination

rates have not broken much above 50%. The facilities are simply not set up in a way to allow for

adequate isolation of infected persons or for proper distancing among those incarcerated. There is

no obligation that jail time be enjoyable, but we should at least be able to protect the physical health

and safety of those incarcerated. Right now, even that basic protection is simply not possible.

         While the simple guideline analysis would call for a period of additional incarceration here, it

is up to this court to make the more nuanced determination as to what the appropriate resolution

should be. Congress has provided guidance in 18 U.S.C. § 3582(a) as follows:

        The court, in determining whether to impose a term of imprisonment, and, if a term of
        imprisonment is to be imposed, in determining the length of the term, shall consider the
        factors set forth in section 3553(a) to the extent that they are applicable, recognizing that
        imprisonment is not an appropriate means of promoting correction and rehabilitation.

1    Federal prisons forced to use cooks, nurses to guard inmates due to staff shortages.
    https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/federal-prisons-forced-use-cooks-nurses-guard-inmates-due-staff-
    n1268138
                                                     8
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 9 of 10                               PageID #: 145




A 1996 Sentencing Commission paper acknowledged that non-prison sentences are associated with

less recidivism than prison sentences, and that non-prison, “alternatives divert offenders from the

criminogenic effects of imprisonment which include contact with more serious offenders, disruption

of legal employment, and weakening of family ties.”2

        In aggregate, the proposed sentence of time served followed by supervised release would

satisfy all the purposes of sentencing and avoid many of the negative effects that a prison sentence

would have. There is simply no good reason to further incarcerate David and this Court has

alternatives at its disposal. Those alternatives are less traumatizing on the defendant but, more

importantly, they are also more effective ways to satisfy the goals of sentencing. We have now an

opportunity to use those alternatives not just as an act of mercy but as an act of justice.




December 7, 2021
                                                                    /s/ Luke Rioux
                                                                    Luke Rioux (9915)
                                                                    Attorney for Defendant
                                                                    97A Exchange St #404
                                                                    Portland ME 04101
                                                                    207-358-4909
                                                                    luke@rdcplawyers.com



                                     CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

I, Luke Rioux, Esq., hereby certify that I have caused this motion to be electronically filed with
CM/ECF system which will send electronic notice of this filing to:

Assistant United States Attorney Andrew McCormack

                                                                    /s/ Luke Rioux

2 U.S. Sentencing Commission, Staff Discussion Paper, Sentencing Options under the Guidelines (Nov. 1996),
available at http://www.rashkind.com/alternatives/dir_00/USSC_sentencingoptions.pdf.
                                                       9
Case 1:21-cr-00078-LEW Document 60 Filed 12/07/21 Page 10 of 10     PageID #: 146




                                               Luke Rioux (9915)
                                               Attorney for Defendant
                                               97A Exchange St #404
                                               Portland ME 04101
                                               207-358-4909
                                               luke@rdcplawyers.com




                                     10
