           Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 1 of 9



                                                          u.s. Department of Justice
                                                          Carmen M. Ortiz
                                                          United States Attorney
                                                          District ofMassachusetts

Main Reception: (617) 748-3100                            John Joseph Moakley United States Courthouse
                                                          1 Courthouse Way
                                                          Suite 9200
                                                          Boston, Massachusetts 02210

                                                          February 3, 2015


Robert L. Sheketoff, Esq.
One McKinley Square
Boston, Ma 02109

          Re:       United States v. Alexis Hidalgo et al.,
                    Criminal No. 13-10017-RWZ

Dear Mr. Sheketoff:

       This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United States Attorney for the District of
Massachusetts ("the U.S. Attorney") and your client, Alexis Hidalgo ("Defendant"), in the
above-referenced case. The Agreement is as follows:

          1.        Change of Plea

        At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall plead guilty to all counts in which he is
named in the above-referenced Superseding Indictment: Count One, conspiracy to distribute
cocaine base, cocaine, oxycodone, and marijuana, in violation of Title 21, United States Code,
Sections 846 and 841(b)(l)(A)(iii) and (b)(l)(B)(ii); and Counts Three and Four, each charging
distribution of cocaine base, in violation of Title 21, United States Code, Section 841(a)(l).
Defendant expressly and unequivocally admits that he committed the crimes charged in Counts
One, Three and Four of the Superseding Indictment, did so knowingly and intentionally, and is in
fact guilty of those offenses.

       Defendant also admits that the conspiracy charged in Count One of the Superseding
Indictment involved 280 grams or more of cocaine base, a Schedule II controlled substance, and
that 280 grams or more of cocaine base is attributable and was reasonably foreseeable to him.
Further, Defendant admits that the conspiracy charged in Count One of the Superseding
Indictment involved 500 grams or more of cocaine, a Schedule II controlled substance, and that
500 grams or more of cocaine is attributable and was reasonably foreseeable to him.

       The U.S. Attorney agrees to withdraw the Information previously filed in this case
pursuant to Title 21, United States Code, Section 851.
                                                      1
       Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 2 of 9




       2.     Penalties

        Defendant faces the following mandatory minimum and maximum penalties on Count
One of the Superseding Indictment following the withdrawal of the Section 851 Information
previously filed: incarceration for not less than 10 years and not more than life; supervised
release for not less than 5 years and not more than life; a fine of not more than $10,000,000; a
mandatory special assessment of $100; and forfeiture to the extent charged in the Superseding
Indictment.

        Further, Defendant also faces the following mandatory minimum and maximum penalties
on each of Counts Three and Four of the Superseding Indictment following the withdrawal of the
Section 851 Information previously filed: incarceration for not more than 20 years; supervised
release for not less than 3 years and not more than life; a fine of not more than $1,000,000; a
mandatory special assessment of $100; and forfeiture to the extent charged in the Superseding
Indictment.

       3.     Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(l)(C) Plea

        This plea agreement is made pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. l1(c)(l)(C), and Defendant's
guilty plea will be tendered pursuant to that provision. In accordance with Rule l1(c)(l)(C), if
the District Court ("Court") accepts this Agreement, the Court must include the agreed
disposition in the judgment. If the Court rejects any aspect of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney
may deem the Agreement null and void. Defendant understands and acknowledges that he may
not withdraw his plea of guilty unless the Court rejects this Agreement under Fed. R. Crim. P.
11(c)(5).

       4.     Sentencing Guidelines

        The parties agree jointly to take the following positions at sentencing under the United
States Sentencing Guidelines ("USSG" or "Guidelines"). The parties agree that Defendant's
total adjusted offense level under the Guidelines is calculated as follows:

   •   Defendant is responsible for the equivalent of at least 10,000 kilograms, but less than
       30,000 kilograms of marijuana (which includes between 2.8 and 8.4 kilograms of cocaine
       base; between 2 and 3.5 kilograms of cocaine; between 80 and 100 kilograms of
       marijuana; and 29.25 grams of oxycodone), according to the drug conversation and
       marijuana equivalency table found in USSG §2D1.1, Application Note 8, and
       §2D1.1(c)(3).

   •   Defendant's base offense level under USSG 2D 1.1 is increased by four levels in
       accordance with USSG §3B1.1(a), because he was an organizer or leader of a criminal
       activity that involved five or more participants or was otherwise extensive.



                                                  2
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 3 of 9



   •   Defendant is a career offender within the meaning ofUSSG §4B1.I(a), however, and
       accordingly, Defendant's base offense level is 37 and his Criminal History Category is
       VI, pursuant to USSG §4B1.I(b).

   •   In accordance with USSG §3EI.I, based on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal
       responsibility for the offenses of conviction in this case, Defendant's adjusted offense
       level is reduced by three, for a total adjusted offense level of 34.

       The U.S. Attorney's agreement that the disposition set forth below is appropriate in this
case is based, in part, on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the
offenses of conviction in this case.

       The U.S. Attorney may, at her sole option, be released from her commitments under this
Agreement, including, but not limited to, her agreement that Paragraph 5 constitutes the
appropriate disposition of this case, if at any time between Defendant's execution of this
Agreement and sentencing, Defendant:

              (a)     Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the plea;

              (b)     Fails to truthfully admit Defendant's conduct in the offenses of conviction;

              (c)     Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant conduct for which
                      Defendant is accountable under USSG §IB1.3;

              (d)     Fails to provide truthful information about Defendant's financial status;

              (e)     Gives false or misleading testimony in any proceeding relating to the
                      criminal conduct charged in this case and any relevant conduct for which
                      Defendant is accountable under USSG §IB1.3;

              (f)     Engages in acts that form a basis for finding that Defendant has obstructed
                      or impeded the administration ofjustice under USSG §3C1.1;

              (g)     Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates any condition of release;

              (h)     Commits a crime;

              (i)     Transfers any asset protected under any provision of this Agreement; or

              G)      Attempts to withdraw Defendant's guilty plea.

       Nothing in this Agreement affects the U.S. Attorney's obligation to provide the Court and
the U.S. Probation Office with accurate and complete information regarding this case.



                                                 3
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 4 of 9



       5.     Agreed Disposition

       Pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. II(c)(1)(C), the U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that the
following is a reasonable and appropriate disposition of this case:

              (a)     incarceration for not less than 144 months and not more than 168 months;

              (b)     96 months of supervised release;

              (c)     a mandatory special assessment of$300; and

              (d)     forfeiture as set forth in Paragraph 9.

       Within the sentencing range agreed to by the parties, the sentence to be imposed upon
Defendant is within the discretion of the Court, subject to the provisions of the advisory USSG
and the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a).

       6.     Payment of Mandatory Special Assessment

       Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to the Clerk of the Court on or
before the date of sentencing, unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that
Defendant is financially unable to do so.

       7.     Waiver of Right to Appeal and to Bring Future Challenge

              (a)     Defendant has conferred with his attorney and understands that he has the
                      right to challenge his conviction in the United States Court of Appeals for
                      the First Circuit ("direct appeal"). Defendant also understands that, in
                      some circumstances, Defendant may be able to challenge his conviction in
                      a future proceeding (collateral or otherwise), such as pursuant to a motion
                      under 28 U.S.C. §2255, 28 U.S.C. §2241 or 18 U.S.C. §3582(c).
                      Defendant waives any right to challenge Defendant's conviction on direct
                      appeal or in any future proceeding (collateral or otherwise).

              (b)     Defendant has conferred with his attorney and understands that defendants
                      ordinarily have a right to challenge in a direct appeal their sentences
                      (including any orders relating to supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and
                      restitution) and may sometimes challenge their sentences (including any
                      orders relating to supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and restitution) in a
                      future proceeding (collateral or otherwise) such as pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
                      §2255, 28 U.S.C. §2241 or 18 U.S.C. §3582. The rights that are ordinarily
                      available to a defendant are limited when a defendant enters into a Rule
                      11 (c)(1)(C) agreement. In this case,-Defendant waives any rights
                      Defendant may have to challenge the agreed-upon sentence (including any
                      agreement relating to supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and restitution)
                      on direct appeal and in a future proceeding (collateral or otherwise), such
                                                 4
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 5 of 9



                       as pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §2255 and 28 U.S.C. §2241. Defendant also
                       waives any right Defendant may have under 18 U.S.C. §3582 to ask the
                       Court to modify the sentence, even if the USSG are later amended in a
                       way that appears favorable to Defendant. Likewise, Defendant agrees not
                       to seek to be resentenced with the benefit of any change to Defendant's
                       Criminal History Category that existed at the time of Defendant's original
                       sentencing. Defendant also agrees not to challenge the sentence in an
                       appeal or future proceeding (collateral or otherwise) even if the Court
                       rejects one or more positions advocated by any party at sentencing. In
                       sum, Defendant understands and agrees that in entering into this
                       Agreement, the parties intend that Defendant will receive the benefits of
                       the Agreement and that the sentence will be final.

               (c)     The U.S. Attorney agrees that she will not appeal the imposition by the
                       Court of a sentence within the sentencing range agreed to by the parties as
                       set out in Paragraph 5, even if the Court rejects one or more positions
                       advocated by either party at sentencing.

               (d)    Notwithstanding the previous subparagraphs, Defendant reserves the right
                      to claim that Defendant's lawyer rendered ineffective assistance of
                      counsel under Strickland v. Washington.

       8.      U.S. Probation Office Not Bound By Agreement

       The sentencing disposition agreed upon by the parties and their respective calculations
under the USSG are not binding upon the United States Probation Office.

       9.      Forfeiture

        Defendant understands that the Court will, upon acceptance of Defendant's guilty plea,
enter an order of forfeiture as part of Defendant's sentence, and that the order of forfeiture may
include assets directly traceable to Defendant's offense, assets used to facilitate Defendant's
offense, substitute assets and/or a money judgment equal to the value of the property derived
from, or otherwise involved in, the offense.

        The assets to be forfeited specifically include, without limitation, the following: 1)
$8,756 in United States currency, seized on or about January 17, 2013, in Malden,
Massachusetts; 2) various pieces of jewelry, seized on or about January 17, 2013 in Malden,
Massachusetts; and 3) one white 2008 Infiniti, bearing VIN JNKBV61F08M265195 and MA
registration 811 SM3, seized on or about September 25, 2014 in Dorchester, Massachusetts.
Defendant admits that these assets are subject to forfeiture on the grounds that they constitute, or
are derived from, proceeds obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of his offenses, and/or were
used or intended to be used, in any manner or part, to commit, or to facilitate the commission of,
and such violations. Defendant agrees to consent to the entry of orders of forfeiture for such
property and waives the requirements of Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure II(b)(l)(J), 32.2
and 43(a) regarding notice of the forfeiture in the charging instrument, advice regarding the
                                                 5
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 6 of 9




forfeiture at the change-of-plea hearing, announcement of the forfeiture at sentencing, and
incorporation of the forfeiture in the judgment. Defendant understands and agrees that forfeiture
shall not satisfy or affect any fine, lien, penalty, restitution, cost of imprisonment, tax liability or
any other debt owed to the United States.

         Defendant agrees to assist fully in the forfeiture of the foregoing assets. Defendant
agrees to promptly take all steps necessary to pass clear title to the forfeited assets to the United
States, including but not limited to executing any and all documents necessary to transfer such
title, assisting in bringing any assets located outside of the United States within the jurisdiction
of the United States, and taking whatever steps are necessary to ensure that assets subject to
forfeiture are not sold, disbursed, wasted, hidden or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture.
Defendant further agrees (a) not to assist any third party in asserting a claim to the forfeited
assets in an ancillary proceeding, and (b) to testify truthfully in any such proceeding. Defendant
further agrees to be deposed with respect to Defendant's assets at the request of the U.S.
Attorney.

        Defendant also agrees to waive all constitutional, legal and equitable challenges
(including direct appeal, habeas corpus, or any other means) to any forfeiture carried out in
accordance with this Agreement. Defendant agrees not to challenge or seek review of any civil
or administrative forfeiture of any property subject to forfeiture under this Agreement, and will
not assist any third party with regard to such challenge or review.

       Defendant hereby waives and releases any claims Defendant may have to any vehicles,
currency, or other personal property seized by the United States, or seized by any state or local
law enforcement agency and turned over to the United States, during the investigation and
prosecution of this case, and consents to the forfeiture of all such assets.

        10.    Information For Presentence Report

       Defendant agrees to provide all information requested by the U.S. Probation Office
concerning Defendant's assets.

        11.     Civil Liability

         By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not compromise any civil
liability, including but not limited to any tax liability, Defendant may have incurred or may incur
as a result of Defendant's conduct and plea of guilty to the charges specified in Paragraph 1 of
this Agreement.

        12.     Withdrawal of Plea By Defendant or Rejection of Plea by Court

         Should Defendant move to withdraw his guilty plea at any time, or should the Court
reject the parties' agreed-upon disposition of the case or any other aspect of this Agreement, this
Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the U.S. Attorney. In this event, Defendant
agrees to waive any defenses based upon the statute of limitations, the constitutional protection
against pre-indictment delay, and the Speedy Trial Act with respect to any and all charges that
                                                   6
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 7 of 9



could have been timely brought or pursued as of the date of this Agreement.

       13.    Breach of Agreement

        If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to comply with any provision of
this Agreement, has engaged in any of the activities set forth in Paragraph 4(a)-G), has violated
any condition of Defendant's pretrial release, or has committed any crime following Defendant's
execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may, at her sole option, be released from her
commitments under this Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through counselor
otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also pursue all remedies available to her under the
law, regardless whether she elects to be released from her commitments under this Agreement.
Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and all charges which otherwise may have been
brought against Defendant and/or have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this Agreement.
Defendant understands that his breach of an obligation under this Agreement shall not give rise
to grounds for withdrawal of Defendant's guilty plea, but will give the U.S. Attorney the right to
use against Defendant before any grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes,
any statements that Defendant may make, and any information, materials, documents or objects
that Defendant may provide to the government subsequent to this Agreement, without any
limitation. In this regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges that Defendant
might otherwise have based upon any statute of limitations, the constitutional protection against
pre-indictment delay, or the Speedy Trial Act.

       14.     Who Is Bound By Agreement

        This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts, and
cannot and does not bind the Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state or
local prosecutive authorities.




                                                7
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 8 of 9



       15.    Complete Agreement

        This letter contains the complete and only agreement between the parties relating to the
disposition of this case. No promises, representations or agreements have been made other than
those set forth in this letter. This Agreement supersedes prior understandings, if any, of the
parties, whether written or oral. This Agreement can be modified or supplemented only in a
written memorandum signed by the parties or on the record in court.

       If this letter accurately reflects the agreement between the U.S. Attorney and Defendant,
please have Defendant sign the Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below
as Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S. Attorney Emily Cummings.

                                                   Very truly yours,

                                                   CARMEN M. ORTIZ
                                                   United States Attorney

                                            By:




                                               8
        Case 1:13-cr-10017-RWZ Document 1381 Filed 02/04/15 Page 9 of 9



                      ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

        I have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it with my attorney. I hereby
acknowledge that it fully sets forth my agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for
the District of Massachusetts. I further state that no additional promises or representations have
been made to me by any official of the United States in connection with this matter. I understand
the crimes to which I have agreed to plead guilty, the mandatory minimum and maximum
penalties for those offenses and the Sentencing Guideline penalties potentially applicable to
them. I am satisfied with the legal representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had
sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed the charges against me, possible
defenses I might have, the terms of this Plea Agreement and whether I should go to trial. I am
entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly because I am guilty of the
offenses to which I am pleading guilty and I believe this Agreement is in my best interest.




                                                    Defendant

                                                    Date:    ,9/4/15
                                                                 ,
       I certify that Alexis Hidalgo has read this Agreement and that we have discussed its
meaning. I believe he understands the Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely,
voluntarily and knowingly.




                                                    Robert L. Sheketoff
                                                    Attorney for Defendant

                                                     Date:    1-/ ~•/ I~




                                                9
