UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
     v.                       CRIMINAL. NO. 04-10336-NMG-12
                              CIVIL ACTION NO. 10-10835-NMG
JULIO CARRION SANTIAGO,
     Defendant.


               REPORT AND
         RECOMMENDATION ON
      PETITIONER’S MOTION UNDER
 28 U.S.C. § 2255 TO VACATE, SET ASIDE,
 OR CORRECT SENTENCE BY A PERSON IN
 CUSTODY (#522) AND ON PETITIONER’S
MO[TION] FOR AN EVIDENTIARY HEARING
    BASE[D] ON THE GOVERNMENT’S
       SURREBUTTAL BRIEF (#545)

COLLINGS, U.S.M.J.
                          I. Introduction
      The   pro se   petitioner Julio Carrion Santiago (“petitioner” or “Santiago”)
seeks to vacate his conviction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255. Santiago was
convicted after a ten-day jury trial of heroin-related offenses and was sentenced
to 248 months’ imprisonment. His conviction was affirmed on appeal.            See



United States v. Santiago    , 560 F.3d 62 (1 Cir.),              , 130 S. Ct. 140
                                                       cert. denied



(2009). The government urges dismissal of the petition. For the reasons that
follow, the Court shall recommend that the motion under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 be
denied.
                               II. Factual Background



      The Court draws the following facts from the First Circuit’s opinion
affirming Santiago’s conviction. Santiago was arrested along with several others
in connection with his participation in a heroin distribution organization in
Lowell, Massachusetts. The year-long investigation was led by the Drug
Enforcement Agency (“DEA”), with the assistance of state and local police.
During the investigation, DEA agents “tracked Santiago’s van with a GPS unit
and conducted visual surveillance of it; conducted court authorized wiretaps of
cell phones of the defendants; tracked and observed transactions among the
defendants revealed by cell phone conversations; and ultimately seized

                                          2
Santiago’s van (seizing concealed drugs) and searched his residence and those
of [codefendants (seizing drugs and paraphernalia)].”   Santiago , 560 F.3d at 64-
65. In searching Santiago’s residence, officers uncovered the following: “a drug
press in the hallway between two apartments–one of them Santiago’s [and the
other one vacant]–and, in the attic above the press, a 9 millimeter gun and an
ammunition clip along with heroin, a digital scale, a bag with silencers and a
magazine for a smaller weapon.”      Id.   at 65. The officers “found additional
paraphernalia inside Santiago’s apartment.”     Id.



                          III. Procedural Background



      A jury found Santiago guilty of conspiracy to distribute heroin and to
possess heroin with intent to distribute under 21 U.S.C. §§ 846, 841(b)(1), and
of possessing firearms in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime under 18 U.S.C.
§ 924(c), and of possession of unregistered firearms under 26 U.S.C. § 5861(d).
The jury also found that the conspiracy involved at least one kilogram of heroin.
      On direct appeal, the First Circuit rejected Santiago’s claims disputing the
sufficiency of the evidence to support the jury’s drug quantity finding and the
jury’s determination that the gun found in the attic could be attributed to
Santiago.

                                           3
      On May 10, 2010, Santiago filed the present Motion Under 28 U.S.C. §
2255 to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Sentence by a Person in Custody (#522),
along with a Memorandum of Law and Facts in Support (#522-1). He asserts
several claims: 1) trial counsel was ineffective in failing to introduce evidence
that would have called into question Santiago’s constructive possession of the
firearm located in the attic; 2) trial counsel was ineffective in failing to
subpoena the analyst who had prepared the laboratory report concerning the
amount and type of drugs; and 3) trial counsel labored under a conflict of
interest that affected the adequacy of representation. Santiago also appears to
raise a direct challenge to his sentence, and to contend that the prosecution
failed to disclose certain information in violation of its obligations under   Brady



v. Maryland , 373 U.S. 83 (1963).
      On June 7, 2010, the government filed its Response to Defendant’s
Motion Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255 and Request for Summary Dismissal
(#526), with exhibits. On July 30, 2010, Santiago filed his Rebuttal to
Government Request for Summary Dismissal of Petitioner’s 28 U.S.C. §§ 2255
[sic]. (#539) With leave granted, the government filed its Surrebuttal to
Petitioner’s Rebuttal to Government’s Request for Summary Dismissal of 28


                                        4
U.S.C. § 2255 Petition. (#544) The motions are thus ripe for disposition. Also
pending are Santiago’s motion for an evidentiary hearing (#545) and the
government’s opposition (#547).
                                 IV. Discussion



                A. Claims of Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
      Santiago’s ineffective assistance of counsel claims are governed by the
familiar standard set out in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 688, 694
(1984). To succeed on a Sixth Amendment claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, a defendant must establish that his "counsel's representation 'fell below
an objective standard of reasonableness'” and that “'there is a reasonable
probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the
proceeding would have been different.'" Moreno-Espada v. United States, 666
F.3d 60, 64 (1 Cir., 2012) (quoting Padilla v. Kentucky, 130 S. Ct. 1473, 1482
(2010) (further internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Under
Strickland, “[a] reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine
confidence in the outcome.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694. With regard to the
performance aspect of the standard, "[t]here is a 'strong presumption that
counsel's conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable professional

                                        5
assistance,' and [a petitioner] 'must overcome the presumption that . . . the
challenged action might be considered sound trial strategy.'" Tevlin v. Spencer,
621 F.3d 59, 66 (1 Cir., 2010) (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689) (further
citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (third alteration in original).
Accordingly, “a lawyer's performance is deficient under Strickland ‘only where,
given the facts known at the time, counsel's choice was so patently
unreasonable that no competent attorney would have made it.'" Id. (quoting
Knight v. Spencer, 447 F.3d 6, 15 (1 Cir., 2006)).
      Santiago raises two ineffective assistance of counsel claims. First, he
contends that his trial counsel was ineffective in failing to introduce evidence
at trial that would have established that Santiago was innocent of the weapons
offenses. Second, he faults his counsel for failing to subpoena the government’s
chemist who was responsible for preparing the report used to establish the
nature and quantity of the drugs seized. The Court considers these two claims.
    1. Alleged Failure to Introduce Evidence Challenging Weapons Offense
      Santiago claims that his trial counsel was ineffective in failing to establish
certain factual details that, according to Santiago, would have cast doubt on the
conclusion that Santiago constructively possessed the weapon that was seized

                                         6
during a search of Santiago’s apartment building.
      The following details, drawn from the trial transcripts, provide context for
the claim. At trial, David Napolitano (“Napolitano”), the state trooper who
assisted in executing a search warrant at Santiago’s apartment, testified that
when he went through the back door of the apartment to a hallway, he “noticed
there was a doorway to an attic space with a [drug] press underneath.” (#464,
Trial Tr. VI:111) He further testified that he entered the attic by standing on
the press and lifting himself up into the attic. (Id. at 114) Once in the attic,
Napolitano testified that it was dark, and that in searching “right around the
hole” to the attic, he lifted up the insulation and found a 9 millimeter gun with
a clip inside it. (Id.) Napolitano stated that he found the gun “within 12
inches” from the opening to the attic and that “[i]f you had reached up, you
could grab it. If I had known it was there, I could have reached up and grabbed
it.” (Id. at 115) Likewise, he testified that he found a plastic bag in the attic
that contained several fingers of heroin, three digital scales, a bag containing
tools, and two or three silencers, all located just inside the access panel under
the insulation. (Id. at 116-117, 125) He also testified that during the initial
search the attic was lit only from light coming from the hallway, but that

                                        7
eventually a light was turned on in the attic. (Id. at 118-119)
      In addition, Dennis Barton (“Barton”), a DEA agent who also assisted in
executing the search warrant, testified, among other things, that during his
search of Santiago’s apartment he found finger press dies used to compress
drugs, a number of cell phones, a portable money counter, and a spiral
notebook containing a number of names and phone numbers (Id. at 140-141,
145, 147) In addition, Barton testified that the building manager said that the
lights to the attic were on the same circuit breaker as the vacant apartment next
door, so that access to the lights was through the circuit breaker in the vacant
apartment. (Id. at 170) Finally, Barton testified that the insulation looked
“fairly new.” (Id. at 172)
      Seizing on these details, Santiago now contends in his habeas petition that
his counsel was ineffective in failing to argue that the facts surrounding the
location of the gun suggested Santiago’s innocence. In particular, he says that
his counsel should have probed more deeply into the circumstances surrounding
the installation of the insulation–who installed it, and when, and whether the
landlord gave the key to workers and left them unsecured. He suggests that if
counsel had done so, “this would have given the jury something to think about.”

                                       8
(#522-1 at 3) He also appears to suggest that the location of the light switch
in the vacant apartment indicates that Santiago did not control the attic space.
      This speculative argument fails to establish constitutional ineffectiveness
under Strickland. As the First Circuit observed:
            The jury knew about Santiago’s drug dealing, the
            proximity of his apartment to the attic, the
            corresponding paraphernalia in his apartment, the
            concealment of access to the attic and the absence of
            others likely to have used the attic. Under these
            circumstances, the jury was free to reason that the
            drugs in the attic were part of the conspiracy and that
            the gun was constructively possessed by Santiago.
Santiago, 560 F.3d at 65-66.
Even if the insulation had been recently installed, Santiago does not explain
why the jury would not still have been free to infer that Santiago had concealed
the gun in the attic after the insulation had been installed–whether two months
before or two weeks before. To the extent that Santiago suggests that someone
else may have concealed the gun and drugs there, his argument is pure
speculation and runs counter to the evidence. In short, Santiago has not
established that his counsel was unreasonable in not investigating what
appeared to be an unpromising line of attack: that is, defense counsel appears
to have made a reasonably strategic decision not to pursue an implausible

                                       9
theory connected to the installation of the insulation. (Notably, defense counsel
did question Agent Barton about whether Barton had investigated when the
insulation was installed, and was met with Barton’s commonsense response
about the significance of the insulation: “someone can hide something or put
something in an attic in five minutes at any time. It could have been an hour
before I got to the apartment as far as I know.” [Id. at 173].) In addition, given
the strength of the government’s case, Santiago has not established that but for
the purported failure of counsel, the result would have been any different.
      Santiago also suggests that the indictment was defective because it
charged him with possession of the gun and not constructive possession. This
claim is baseless: “To convict a defendant under § 924(c)(1)(A), the
government must prove that the defendant (1) committed a drug trafficking
crime; (2) knowingly possessed a firearm; and (3) possessed the firearm in
furtherance of the drug trafficking crime.” United States v. Vazquez-Castro, 640
F.3d 19, 25 (1 Cir., 2011). “Possession” under the provision may be
“constructive,” id. at 26, and “constructive possession is possession, not a
separate predicate act that has to be spelled out in the indictment,” United States
v. Rogers, 41 F.3d 25, 30 n.3 (1 Cir., 1994), cert. denied, 515 U.S. 1126 (1995).


                                        10
The indictment here provided fair notice of the charge.
                        2. Failure to Subpoena Chemist
      Santiago next faults his defense counsel for failing to subpoena the
government chemist who prepared the reports introduced at trial to establish
drug quantity and type. He relies on Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U.S.
305 (2009), which held that "certificates of analysis" introduced at trial to
establish the results of a forensic analysis performed on seized drugs amounted
to testimonial statements, and that the drug analysts who had prepared the
certificates were subject to confrontation. See Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 310.
The government contends that Santiago may not receive the benefit of the rule
announced in Melendez-Diaz because Melendez-Diaz has not been made
retroactive to cases on collateral review. Melendez-Diaz was decided on June
25, 2009, and the Supreme Court denied certiorari review in Santiago’s case on
October 5, 2009. Because Santiago’s conviction was not yet final when
Melendez-Diaz issued, non-retroactivity principles are inapplicable and Santiago
receives the benefit of the holding in Melendez-Diaz. See Derman v. United
States, 298 F.3d 34, 42 (1 Cir.) (noting that, if conviction is not yet final when
Supreme Court announces new rule, then lower courts must apply that rule on

                                       11
collateral review),       cert. denied    , 537 U.S. 1048 (2002). Thus, the Court must
consider the ineffective assistance of counsel claim with                        Melendez-Diaz        as its
guide.
        Still, the government correctly points out that the holding announced in
Melendez-Diaz        does not assist Santiago in this case. Here, the government
notified the defendants of its intention to present the expert testimony of
Jennifer Chu, a forensic chemist for the DEA who had analyzed the drugs at
issue.1 (See #526, Exh. 1, Aff. of William Bloomer ¶ 2) The government
advised defense counsel that Chu would testify regarding the tests that she had
performed on the drugs that had been seized during the investigation. (Id.) All
five defense counsel stipulated to the admission of the laboratory reports in lieu
of Chu’s testimony. (Id. ¶ 3) The government correctly points out that the
stipulation amounted to a strategic decision, which is virtually unchallengeable.
See United States v. Gaskin, 364 F.3d 438, 468 (2d Cir. 2004) (“As a rule,

counsel’s decision to stipulate to certain evidence, like his decisions to offer or
object to evidence, involves a strategic choice, which is ‘virtually

        1

        This point distinguishes this case from Melendez-Diaz, where the state had no intention of calling its
expert to testify, and instead offered sworn affidavits from the chemist, which state law allowed as “prima
facie evidence of the composition, quality, and the net weight” of the seized drugs. Melendez-Diaz v.
Massachusetts, 557 U.S. 305, 309 (2009) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).



                                                     12
unchallengeable’ if made after thorough investigation.”)(quoting Strickland, 466
U.S. at 690-91), cert. denied, 544 U.S. 990 (2005). Here, the defense theory of
the case was not that the drugs were not heroin, but rather that the government
had wrongly attributed them to Santiago. The defense would have gained
nothing by insisting that the jury hear the details of the tests performed on the
drugs. As Melendez-Diaz itself observed, in the ususal drug cases “[i]t is unlikely
that defense counsel will insist on live testimony [about the nature of the
substance] whose effect will be merely to highlight rather than cast doubt upon
the forensic analysis. Nor will defense attorneys want to antagonize the judge
or jury by wasting their time with the appearance of a witness whose testimony
defense counsel does not intend to rebut in any fashion.” Melendez-Diaz, 557
U.S. at 328 (footnote omitted).
      Finally, Santiago has not established a reasonable probability that the
result would have been different if defense counsel had refused to stipulate to
the laboratory reports. Santiago has introduced no evidence that contradicts
the content of the laboratory reports, or that casts doubt on the accuracy of the
reports. For these reasons, the Court concludes that this claim lacks merit.
                            B. Sentencing Challenge




                                        13
      In a direct challenge to his sentence, Santiago contends that he should not
have been subject to both the five-year mandatory minimum on the gun charge
under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i) and the mandatory minimum of 120 months
under the drug offenses. This claim was not raised on direct appeal, although
it could have been, and it can be dismissed on that ground alone. Knight v.
United States, 37 F.3d 769, 773 (1 Cir., 1994) (“Having bypassed his

opportunity to raise the claim on direct appeal, [a petitioner] cannot raise it .
. . on collateral attack.”). In any event, at the time Santiago filed his petition,
First Circuit law foreclosed Santiago’s statutory argument, see United States v.
Parker, 549 F.3d 5, 11 (1 Cir., 2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1688 (2009); since

then, the Supreme Court has squarely addressed and rejected Santiago’s
statutory argument, see Abbott v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 18, 23 (2010)
(holding that “a defendant is subject to a mandatory, consecutive sentence for
a § 924(c) conviction, and is not spared from that sentence by virtue of
receiving a higher mandatory minimum on a different count of conviction. . .
. He is . . . subject to the highest mandatory minimum specified for his conduct
in § 924(c), unless another provision of law directed to conduct proscribed by
§ 924(c) imposes an even greater mandatory minimum.”). For these reasons,

                                        14
this claim must be dismissed.
        C. Brady v. Maryland    and Alleged Attorney Conflict of Interest
        Santiago’s final claim is confusing, but it appears to assert both a claim
under   Brady v. Maryland   , 373 U.S. 83 (1963), and a claim that his defense
counsel labored under a conflict of interest that undermined Santiago’s Sixth
Amendment guarantee to effective representation. To place these claims in
context, the Court notes that John F. Cicilline (hereafter, “John F.”) filed an
appearance at the commencement of federal court proceedings against Santiago.
Santiago contends in his petition that he retained John M. Cicilline (hereafter,
“John M.”), the son of John F. Cicilline, to represent him when he was arrested.
According to the petition, an officer named Chris Hanson assaulted Santiago
during the course of arresting him. Santiago contends that he told his then-
defense counsel, John M., that he wanted to bring charges against the officer.
According to Santiago, John M. dissuaded Santiago from bringing charges
because he was “doing things” with the officer. (   See   # 522-1 at 10). Santiago
alleges that John M. then told Santiago that if Santiago paid him (John M.)
$75,000, John M. would induce Chris Hanson not to testify at trial. In support
of this claim, Santiago has offered a rough translation of what appears to be an


                                        15
online version of a Spanish language Providence newspaper. (      See   #522-2, Exh.
A)
      The Court can take judicial notice of the criminal indictment filed against
John M. Cicilline in this court on January 4, 2007 for obstruction of justice.   See



Docket No. 07-cr-10008-NMG. He pled guilty on August 26, 2008. John M.’s
plea agreement recounts how John M. extracted money from certain of his
clients in exchange for John M.’s efforts to obtain a favorable sentence reduction.
These events roughly overlap with the time of Santiago’s arrest in 2004.
      In his habeas petition, Santiago makes a similar allegation: that John M.
extracted money from Santiago in exchange for John M.’s inducing officer Chris
Hanson not to testify at trial. Based on these allegations, Santiago asserts that
the government violated its obligations under         Brady v. Maryland   ; Santiago
contends that the government must have known of John M.’s criminal activity
but failed to disclose it. “Under   Brady   , the government has a duty to disclose
evidence in its possession that is favorable to the accused and material to guilt
or punishment. Evidence is ‘favorable to the accused’ if it is either exculpatory
or impeaching in nature and ‘material’ if there is a reasonable probability that,
had it been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would have been different.”

                                        16
United States v. Prochilo    , 629 F.3d 264, 268 (1 Cir., 2011)(citation omitted).
       The facts that Santiago alleges do not establish a claim under   Brady. First,
as noted, the docket in Santiago’s case indicates that John F. entered an
appearance on Santiago’s behalf on November 9, 2004, and that John F.
represented Santiago at all stages of the proceedings thereafter, including at
trial. Santiago does not explain how information about John M.’s criminal
activity unrelated to Santiago’s case could have been exculpatory or impeaching
in Santiago’s case or could have had any bearing on the outcome of Santiago’s
jury trial.
       Otherwise, Santiago appears to suggest that the facts alleged establish that
John M. labored under a conflict of interest in violation of the Sixth Amendment
because he was in cahoots with a prosecution witness. Even assuming that the
facts alleged are true, Santiago has not established that the alleged “actual
conflict of interest adversely affected his lawyer's performance.”    Yeboah-Sefah



v. Ficco , 556 F.3d 53, 73 (1 Cir.) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted),                , 130 S. Ct. 639 (2009). The most that Santiago says about
              cert. denied



the adverse effect here is that he “was switch[ed] from one partner to another
in the same law firm without giving reasons why.” (#522-1 at 11) And, in his

                                           17
rebuttal to the government’s response, Santiago cursorily suggests that John F.
had a conflict of interest as follows: “It seem[s] that defense counsel was part of
the undergraded [sic] justice that occurred by Mr. Cicilline and the agent by the
agent not testifying.” (#539 at 9) This unsupported assertion is pure
speculation. Santiago bears the burden of showing that the alleged conflict of
interest goes “beyond a ‘mere theoretical division of loyalties’ and in fact
‘adversely affected his counsel’s performance.’”                              , 530
                                                    United States v. DeCologero



F.3d 36, 76 (1 Cir.) (quoting                   , 535 U.S. 162, 171, 174 (2002))
                                Mickens v. Taylor



(footnote omitted),   cert. denied , 555 U.S. 1005 (2008) and 555 U.S. 1039
(2008). Because Santiago has made no showing that John F.’s purported
conflict of interest adversely affected his performance, this claim fails.




                                         18
                              V. Recommendation
      For all the above reasons, I RECOMMEND that petitioner’s Motion Under
28 U.S.C. § 2255 to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Sentence by a Person in Federal
Custody (#522) be DENIED. I FURTHER RECOMMEND that Petitioner’s
Mo[tion] for an Evidentiary Hearing Base[d] on the Government’s Surrebuttal
Brief (#545), be DENIED.
                        VI. Review by the District Judge
      The parties are hereby advised that any party who objects to these
recommendations must file a specific written objection thereto with the Clerk of
this Court within 14 days of the party’s receipt of this Report and
Recommendation. The written objections must specifically identify the portion
of the recommendations, or report to which objection is made and the basis for
such objections. The parties are further advised that the United States Court of
Appeals for this Circuit has repeatedly indicated that failure to comply with Rule
72(b), Fed. R. Civ. P., shall preclude further appellate review. See Keating v.
Secretary of Health and Human Services, 848 F.2d 271 (1 Cir., 1988); United
States v. Emiliano Valencia-Copete, 792 F.2d 4 (1 Cir., 1986); Scott v. Schweiker,
702 F.2d 13, 14 (1 Cir., 1983); United States v. Vega, 678 F.2d 376, 378-379 (1

                                       19
Cir., 1982); Park Motor Mart, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 616 F.2d 603(1 Cir., 1980);
see also Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140 (1985).

                        /s/ Robert B. Collings
                        ROBERT B. COLLINGS
                        United States Magistrate Judge
November 5, 2012.




                                       20
