P.....12A
(719])

                                      United~tates District Court

                                    for the strict of Massachusetts

                                  Report on . ender Under Supervision



  Name of Offender: Darnell Upshaw                                        Case Number: 0101 1:15CRI0395
  Name of Sentencing Judicial Officer: Honorable George A. O'Toole, U.S. District Judge
  Date of Original Sentence: September 13,2016
  Original Offense: UNLAWFUL TRANSPORt OF FIREARMS - ETC. 18:922G.F
  Original Sentence: 18 Monthsof custodyfollowed by 36 Months supervised release
  Type of Supervision: Term Of Supervised Release       Date Supervision Commenced: November 18,2016


                                    NON-COMPLIANCE SUMMARY



Violation Number     Nature of Noncompliance

            I        Violation of Mandatorv fondition: The defendant shall not possess a flrearm,
                     ammunition, destruettvedevtee, or any other dangerous weapon.

                     According to a BrOCktonjROlice Department Field Interview Report, on March24, 2017,
                     officers initiateda traffic op on an illegallyparked car in a no parking area across from
                     Mr. Upshaw's residence. fficers spokewith boththe operatorofthe motorvehicle as well
                     as the passenger, who was identified as Darnell Upshaw. Mr. Upshaw's daughter was
                     seated in the backseat be nd him.

                     Officers saw that there was an open containerof alcohol betweenthe front passenger seat
                     and center console. The operatorof the motor vehicle also had a suspended license. She
                     was removedfrom the ve cle and eventuallyallowedto leave with the child. Mr. Upshaw,
                     who had a knife clippedto his right front pants pocket, was removedfromthe car. Officers
                     removedthe knife and co ucted a pat-frisk search. Additionally, a pat-frisk search was
                     conducted on the passeng compartment area of the motor vehicle before allowing Mr.
                     Upshawto move the vehi e. No other weapons were found.

                     Officers viewed the knife and discovered that it was spring assisted. They advised Mr.
                     Upshawthat it was illegal and subsequently confiscated it. Both Mr. Upshawand the
                     operatorof the motor vehicle were given verbal warnings.


U.S. Probation OfficerAction:

The probation officerespectfully requests no co* action at this time. The probation office has addressed this
incident with Mr. Upshawwho informs that he ~ unaware that the knife he was carrying was illegal, stating it
was small but did have a small spring opening feature, Nonetheless, Mr. Upshaw was verballyreprimanded and
has beenput on notice with regard to the seriousnessof this instance as well as any future violations of this
condition going forward. The probationoffice will continueto monitor Mr. Upshaw's case closelyand keep the
Prob 12A                                                               -2­                                         Report on Offender Under Supervision


court apprisedof any future violation conduct.

Reviewed!Approved by:                                                                                      Respectfully submitted,

lsi Basi/F Cronin                                                                                       lsi Erin K Hennemann
Basil F Cronin                                                                                       by Erin K Hennemann
Supervision U.S. Probation Officer                                                                      U.S. Probation Officer
                                                                                                        Date:           4/1912017


                            No Ruponse Is neclUMJlY IJIIless i/IeCOIU1 dl",cts thDtaddilionDl DCtlon be talttn (Ufo/lows:

[X]    Approved
[ ]    Submita Request for Modifying the Conditions or Term of Supervision
[ ]    Submit a Request for Warrant or Summons
[ ]    Other

                                                                                              /s/ George A. O'Toole, Jr.
                                                                                             Signature of Judicial Officer


                                                                                                  4/26/2017
                                                                                             Date
