                                IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                  FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

 Plaintiff,

 v.
                                                             Crim. No. 14-415/14-637(DRD)
 CARLOS LOPEZ-SOTO,

 Defendant.


                                                   ORDER

         Defendant Carlos Lopez-Soto filed a Motion for Recusal of the undersigned as well as recusal of

United States Attorneys Victor Acevedo-Hernandez and Kelly Zenon-Matos (Docket No. 499). Defendant

posits the Court denied a prior motion wherein Defendant moved to recuse the aforementioned prosecutors

on grounds that the government made knowing use of materially false testimony at trial. Because the Court

denied this motion, as well as numerous pretrial motions filed by Defendant, Defendant understands the

Court has shown bias against him and should recuse itself.

         The First Circuit has held that a judge must be disqualified, or recuse him or herself, when the facts

alleged against him “provide what an objective, knowledgeable member of the public would find to be a

reasonable basis for doubting the judge's impartiality.” In re Boston's Children First, 244 F.3d 164, 167 (1st

Cir.2001) (quoting In re United States, 666 F.2d 690, 695 (1st Cir.1998)). The First Circuit has also held that

“doubts ordinarily ought to be resolved in favor of recusal.” In re United States, 441 F.3d 44, 56–57 (1st

Cir.2006). In the instant case, Defendant is a pro se litigant with no prior legal experience. As a result, the

Court’s denial of several pretrial and post-trial motions have prompted the conclusion that the Court is biased

against him. However, Defendant’s motion is a mere expression of frustration from a “disgruntled party

[seeking] to remove a judge whose rulings the party dislikes.” Id at 67.
                                                       1
        The analysis then turns on whether “an objective, reasonable member of the public, fully informed

of all the relevant facts, would fairly question the trial judge's impartiality.” Id. at 56-57 (emphasis ours).

Although the reasonable appearance of partiality requires the judge to recuse himself, “[t]his does not mean

that required recusal can be based on an unsupported, irrational, or highly tenuous speculation.'” In

re Martinez–Catala, 129 F.3d 213, 220 (emphasis ours). Defendant’s arguments regarding materially false

testimony misstate the reality of trial. Defendant’s allegations would never lead an objective, reasonable

person, when appraised of all the facts, to question the Court’s impartiality. Instead, Defendant’s arguments

reflect a misunderstanding of the law.

        The Court concedes that Defendant was able to impeach trial witness Roberto Garcia-Santiago on

several small contradictions between the witnesses’ grand jury testimony and his trial testimony. However,

likening impeachment to a concerted effort between the Court and the United States’ attorneys to bring forth

false claims against Defendant is a ludicrous proposition. Defendant’s arguments are particularly confusing

in light of the fact that videos, still photographs, and fact witnesses present at the robberies corroborated

Roberto Garcia-Santiago’s testimony against Defendant.

        Finally, it is worth noting that friction with a litigant is rarely grounds for recusal. Although no heated

incidents are alleged by Defendant, it is not sufficient that the presiding judge make critical remarks or

comments directed at a party or his attorney, or that there were other indications of animosity or friction. See

King v. First American Investigations, Inc., 287 F.3d 91, 96 (2d Cir. 2002), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 960, 123 S.

Ct. 393, 154 L. Ed. 2d 314 (2002)(Plaintiff's assertions that judge accused him of abusing the judicial process,

referred to plaintiff as paranoid, accused plaintiff of “pulling a stunt” in attempting to make a showing at trial,

favored defendants because two of them were of the same ethnicity as he, and other allegations did not

require recusal.)(emphasis ours); see also Mitchell v. Kirk, 20 F.3d 936 (8th Cir. 1994)(District judge's heated

exchanges with, and admonishments of, pro se inmate in front of jury did not establish judicial bias, advocacy,

or partiality, but rather were attempts to maintain control over proceedings and to preserve courtroom
                                                        2
decorum; judge never commented on merits of inmate's case, and only remarked on inmate's presentation

of his case and his courtroom antics)(emphasis ours).

        The Court finds Defendant Carlos Lopez-Soto’s Motion for Recusal fails to lead a reasonable person

to question the Court’s impartiality. The issues raised by Defendant as to the Court’s rulings raised by

Defendant are matters that are best argued in a direct appeal as “judicial rulings alone almost never

constitute a valid basis for bias or partiality . . . the rulings are ‘proper grounds for appeal not recusal.’”.

Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 540, 555 (1994)(emphasis ours). Alternatively, the ethical charges brought

against the United States’ attorneys by Defendant must be accompanied with evidence beyond transcripts

of instances where Defendant impeached a witness. The Court would certainly indulge arguments of ethical

violations were they to be supported by credible. Accordingly, Defendant’s Motion for Recusal (Docket No.

499) is hereby DENIED.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 16th day of May, 2017.
                                                            /s/ Daniel R. Dominguez
                                                            DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
                                                            U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE




                                                       3
