                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                              DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA               )
                                       )
       v.                              )        1:17-cr-00057-JAW
                                       )
STEVEN LEMIEUX                         )


     ORDER ON MOTION IN LIMINE REGARDING PRIOR CONVICTION

       With trial scheduled to begin on June 14, 2017, the Government moves in

limine to preclude Steven Lemieux from admitting any evidence pertaining to a

collateral attack on his underlying conviction for false statements on a firearms form

or his previous conviction for misdemeanor assault. Gov’t’s Mot. in Lim. Regarding

Prior Conviction (ECF No. 44) (Gov’t’s Mot.).

I.     BACKGROUND

       Steven Lemieux is charged in a two-count indictment for possession of firearms

and ammunition by a person who has been previously convicted of at least one crime

punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year. Indictment (ECF No. 2).

The predicate offense for these charges is a 2006 conviction in this Court in which

Mr. Lemieux was convicted of violating 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6) for lying on a firearms

form when he denied that he was barred from possessing firearms even though he

had been previously convicted of domestic assault by the state of Maine. Id. at 1;

Gov’t’s Mot. at 1.

       On December 14, 2016, Fairfield Police officers executing a search warrant at

Mr. Lemieux’s residence discovered six firearms and 784 rounds of ammunition.
Gov’t’s Mot. at 1. When presented with the inventory of the search, Mr. Lemieux

commented on his belief that the officers were stealing the firearms and later made

a claim on the same firearms when the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and

Explosives (ATF) initiated forfeiture proceedings. Id. When ATF Special Agent John

Schroepfer came to Mr. Lemieux’s residence on March 9, 2017 to discuss the claim,

Mr. Lemieux acknowledged being jailed for his prior conviction, professed that he had

never done anything wrong, and referred to his prior conviction as “f---ing bulls---t

too.” Id. at 1–2.

      According to the Government, the places of manufacture of the subject firearms

are not disputed and Mr. Lemieux has not denied his possession of the firearms or

the fact of his prior conviction. Id. at 2. The Government therefore anticipates that

Mr. Lemieux’s defense will be related to his professed innocence on any underlying

offense, which it argues is not a valid defense. Id.

      Mr. Lemieux responded to the Government’s motion in limine on June 11,

2017. Def.’s Resp. to Gov’t’s Mot. in Lim.: Collateral Attack on Underlying Felony

Conviction (ECF No. 53) (Def.’s Opp’n). In his response, Mr. Lemieux stated that he

“denies he ‘did anything wrong’ and therefore denies the underlying conviction as

charged and/or that he is a prohibited person.” Id. at 1. He explains that he “does

not intend to maintain a legal attack on the validity of the underlying conviction” and

states that he will “take the position that he has ‘done nothing wrong.’” Id.




                                              2
II.    DISCUSSION

       In order to prove a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), the Government must

prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Lemieux has been convicted in any court

of at least one crime punishable by a term of imprisonment for a term exceeding one

year. See 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). The Government seeks to do so by introducing

evidence of Mr. Lemieux’s 2006 conviction for false statements on a firearms form

and is concerned that Mr. Lemieux will attempt to collaterally attack this prior

conviction by making statements concerning his innocence of the conduct underlying

the offense. However, as Mr. Lemieux acknowledges in his response, he cannot do

so.

       In Lewis v. United States, 445 U.S. 55 (1980), the United States Supreme Court

expressly held that “a convicted felon may challenge the validity of a prior conviction,

or otherwise remove his disability, before obtaining a firearm” but that “firearms

prosecution does not open the predicate conviction to a new form of collateral attack.”

Id. at 67.1 Additionally, the First Circuit, relying on Lewis, has held that the later

vacating of a state court conviction does not invalidate a defendant’s federal

conviction as a felon in possession of a firearm under 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) because

the defendant was a felon at the time of the charged possession. United States v.

Snyder, 235 F.3d 42, 53 (1st Cir. 2000).




1       In Lewis, the appellant challenged his conviction under a statute that preceded 18 U.S.C. §
922(g)(1). However, the Supreme Court recognized that there was “little significant difference”
between the statute at issue in that case and § 922(g)(1). Id. at 64.


                                                    3
III.   CONCLUSION

       Given Lewis and Snyder, as well as Mr. Lemieux’s lack of objection and

confirmation that he may not collaterally attack the legal validity of the underlying

conviction, the Court GRANTS the Government’s Motion in Limine Regarding Prior

Conviction (ECF No. 44). Consistent with his concession, the Court prohibits defense

counsel from inquiring into whether there was an adequate underlying factual basis

for Mr. Lemieux’s prior conviction. See Def.’s Opp’n at 2.

       SO ORDERED.

                                       /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                       JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR
                                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 12th day of June, 2017




                                             4
