      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 1 of 12



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA          )
                                  )
V.                                )        DOCKET NO. 08 CR-10101-JLT
                                  )
EMMANUEL MERVIL                   )


                  GOVERNMENT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM

     The United States Government respectfully submits this

memorandum in connection with the upcoming sentencing hearing on

this matter, currently scheduled for June 17, 2013.          As discussed

below, the Government agrees with Probation’s conclusions in the

Pre Sentence Report (the “PSR”).          As an offender sentenced under

18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) with two prior felony convictions,

Defendant’s advisory guideline range, with acceptance of

responsibility, is 63-78 months [PSR ¶ 76].         The Government

believes that a sentence of 65 months’ imprisonment, on the lower

end of the Guideline range, three years’ supervised release, and

a mandatory $100 special assessment is an appropriate disposition

to this matter.

                     DEFENDANT’S CRIMINAL OFFENSE

     The Government incorporates the facts as stated in the PSR,

which, as written, are uncontested.         The Government sets forth

briefly the relevant background of Defendant’s offense.

     On October 14, 2007, at about 4:30 p.m., Boston Police

Department received a 911 call from Massachusetts State Police,

                                      1
         Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 2 of 12



who had a woman on their 911 line.          The female caller reported

that she was the victim of a domestic incident involving a man,

Emmanuel Mervil, with a firearm.           The female was calling from 17

Hilton St. in Hyde Park, MA and several units were dispatched to

this location.

     Officers Gorman and Moscaritolo were the first on the scene,

followed shortly by Officers Kilduff and O’Keefe. While O’Keefe

went around the rear of the house, Gorman, Moscaritolo, and

Kilduff approached the front door.          A distraught and crying

female answered the door and informed the officers that Mervil

was upstairs.      At this time, one of the officers saw Mervil

heading up the stairs to the second floor.           The officers followed

Mervil upstairs to the second floor landing where two adults

informed officers that Mervil had continued to the third floor.

     Officers Kilduff and Moscaritolo headed up the stairway to

the third floor.      At this time, Officer O’Keefe, who was at the

rear of the house, observed Mervil attempting to exit the house

through an open third floor window.          Officer O’Keefe announced

his presence to Mervil and ordered him to stop and put up his

hands.     Upon Officer O’Keefe’s command, Mervil reentered the

house through the third floor window.

     The stairway leading to the third floor entered the middle

of a front to back hallway.        When Officers Kilduff and

Moscaritolo were halfway up the stairs, they observed Mervil


                                       2
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 3 of 12



moving from the front of the house to the rear, clutching a

handgun in one hand.    Upon arriving in the hallway of the third

floor landing, the officers witnessed Mervil near an open window

in the back bedroom.    Both officers drew their guns, went to the

threshold of the room and ordered Mervil to drop his gun.              After

they repeated the order several times, Mervil dropped the gun

behind a bookcase.    Officers then ordered Mervil to the ground

but he refused and had to be subdued. As the officers escorted

Mervil outside the house, he told the female caller, “you fucked

up now” and “you’re done now bitch.”

     After Mervil was removed from the residence, the female gave

her statement to the police.      She stated that prior to the

officers’ arrival, she and Mervil had been arguing.          According to

the female, she often stayed with Mervil on the first floor.             She

stated that she and Mervil had been arguing and that Mervil

pulled out a gun, chambered a round, pointed the gun at her and

threatened, “I can kill you right now.”        At this time, she used

her cell phone to dial 911, until Mervil disconnected the call.

     Officers later recovered the firearm which Mervil had been

holding and discovered that it was loaded with three 9 mm rounds

in the magazine and one round in the chamber.         Upon further

inspection, it was ascertained that the firearm was a 9mm Smith

and Wesson, serial number VJF8239.

     During recovery of the firearm, officers also located an


                                    3
         Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 4 of 12



“Out-Calls Register” with telephone numbers, names of clients,

and amounts of money received from those clients. Additional

information contained in the register led officers to believe

that the register was used for the purpose of the record keeping

of prostitutes.      Officers further located, in plain view, a black

plastic bag containing $19,000 cash. Officers also recovered an

additional $1,1834 in U.S. currency from Mervil’s person.

     Following this incident, Mervil was charged with kidnaping,

assault with a dangerous weapon (firearm), and being a felon in

possession of a firearm.        Mervil was released on bail on November

30, 2007 following his arraignment in West Roxbury District

Court.     On January 22, 2008, Mervil was indicted and charged in

the Suffolk Superior Court with possession of a firearm, assault

with a dangerous weapon, and intimidating a witness.             He then

defaulted on April 17, 2008.         On April 30, 2008, Mervil was

indicted in the United States District Court with being as

previously convicted felon in possession of a firearm.             A warrant

for Mervil’s arrest was issued.

     On March 3, 2012, Mervil was located by a deputy from the

U.S. Marshal’s Service as he exited a Residence Inn motel in

Norwood, MA.      Mervil stated that his name was “Manny” but then

notified law enforcement that his true name was Emmanuel Mervil.

Following this arrest, officers found four driver’s licenses in

various names; two social security cards in various names; two


                                       4
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 5 of 12



birth certificates in various names; $3,000 in U.S. currency;

four cell phones and chargers; and several pieces of personal

property (jewelry).

               GOVERNMENT’S SENTENCING RECOMMENDATION

     On January 7, 2013, Emmanuel Mervil entered a guilty plea on

the above charge, a single count charging Felon in Possession of

a Firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).         The Advisory

Guidelines (“Guidelines”), as determined by Probation, recommends

a sentence of 63-78 months [PSR ¶ 76].       The Government agrees

with this determination and believes that a sentence of 65

months’ imprisonment, on the lower end of the Guideline range,

three years’ supervised release, and a mandatory $100 special

assessment is merited.

     A.   The Applicable Sentencing Guidelines

          1.    Defendant Used or Possessed the Firearm in
                Connection With Another Felony Offense

     Pursuant to the Sentencing Guidelines § 2K2.1, having

sustained at least two felony conviction for crimes of violence

or controlled substance offenses prior to the instant offense,

[PSR ¶¶ 31, 32], Defendant’s base offense level is 24.          However,

in the instant matter, Defendant not only possessed a firearm as

a convicted felon, but Mervil used such firearm in an assault.

The victim stated in her interview, that Mevril pointed the

firearm in question at her and threatened, “I could kill you

now.” [PSR ¶¶ 10, 20]. Pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(b)(6)(B), a

                                    5
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 6 of 12



4-level enhancement is applied for Defendant’s use of the firearm

in connection with the above assault, bringing the adjusted

offense level to a subtotal of 28.

          2.    Defendant’s Acceptance of Responsibility

     Defendant has demonstrated acceptance of responsibility for

the violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), and has been granted a 3-

level reduction in his offense level pursuant to § 3E1.1(a) and

§ 3E1.1(b). With Defendant’s acceptance of responsibility,

Defendant’s total adjusted offense level is 25.

          3.    Defendant Has Two Prior Felony Convictions for
                Crimes of Violence or Controlled Substance
                Offenses

     Prior to his arrest for the instant offense, Defendant, age

31, was convicted on two prior occasions which include both drug-

related offenses and crimes of violence. [PSR ¶¶ 31-32].

Defendant’s criminal history begins at the age of 21, when

Defendant was convicted of possession with intent to distribute a

Class B controlled substance.      While awaiting resolution for the

prior offense, Defendant sustained convictions for resisting

arrest and assault and battery on a police officer.          These

convictions give Defendant a criminal history category of II.

     With an adjusted offense level of 25 and a criminal history

of II, the recommended Guideline Range is 63-78 months’

imprisonment.




                                    6
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 7 of 12



           4.   Defendant’s Obstruction of Justice

     Pursuant to § 3C1.1, the Government could argue for a

further enhancement of Defendant’s offense level because

Defendant willfully obstructed or impeded the administration of

justice with respect to the prosecution of the instant offense.

Defendant was originally arrested by Boston Police Department

officers on October 14, 2007.      He was then released on bail on

November 30, 2007 and defaulted on April 17, 2008          For the next

four years, until his arrest on March 3, 2012, Defendant lived

under various other names for the sole purpose of evading arrest

and prosecution for the instant offense.1

     If the Government were to argue for an obstruction of

justice enhancement, a two-level enhancement would be applied,

bringing the adjusted total offense level to 27 and a recommended

Guideline Range of 78-97 months’ imprisonment.         The Government,

however, has chosen not to do so at this time.

     B.    The Instant Offense

           Possession of a firearm by a felon is a serious

offense.   The offender has already shown a disregard for the law

and arming himself with a firearm is potentially an extremely

dangerous situation.



1
 Defendant reported to the U.S. Probation Department, as
reflected in the PSR ¶ 60, that he “always received [medical]
treatment under a different name because he was afraid of getting
arrested.”

                                    7
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 8 of 12



     In the instant matter, Defendant placed not only the victim

of the domestic assault in fear for her life, but threatened the

safety of the responding officers and the greater Boston

community by attempting to flee with the loaded weapon in hand.

A sentence of 65 months’ imprisonment, the lower end of the

Guideline Range, is warranted to apprise Defendant of the impact

his conduct had on the female victim, as well as the arresting

officers.

     C.     Sentencing Factors Under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)

            18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) requires a sentencing court to

consider specific, enumerated factors when determining an

appropriate sentence.    These factors include: 1) “the nature and

circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics

of the defendant” and 2) the need for the sentence imposed to

reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for

the law, to provide just punishment for the offense, to afford

adequate deterrence to criminal conduct, to protect the public

from further crimes of the defendant, and to provide for the

needs of the defendant.

            1.   The History and Characteristics of the Defendant

     The Court has the benefit of the PSR to examine Defendant’s

criminal history.    Defendant has two prior felony convictions

stemming from actions he took at the age of 21, both of which are

crimes of violence or controlled substance offenses.          As given in


                                    8
      Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 9 of 12



the PSR, Defendant has convictions for possession with intent to

distribute a controlled Class B substance [PSR ¶ 31]; and

resisting arrest and assault and battery of a police officer.

[PSR ¶ 32].     Defendant has shown a predilection for committing

crimes of violence as well as a disregard for the law.

     As such, the Government believes that a sentence of 65

months’ imprisonment, the lower end of the Guideline range, is

merited.

           2.     The Nature and Circumstances of the Offense

     The instant offense is an example of a brazen undertaking by

the Defendant.     Having been previously convicted of a number of

felonies, Defendant was well aware that he, as a felon, was

prohibited from possessing a firearm.

     However, despite this awareness, Defendant willingly and

knowingly possessed a firearm.      Defendant further loaded a round

into the chamber, with three more in the magazine.         Defendant did

this in the presence of the victim and used the same loaded gun

to threaten her safety. Loading a firearm, brandishing it at

another person, and threatening to kill such other person are all

actions consistent with an intent to fire the weapon.          Defendant

put the safety of the victim at risk and caused her significant

terror by placing her in fear for her life.

     Additionally, when police arrived, Defendant attempted to

flee the scene while still carrying the loaded handgun.


                                    9
     Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 10 of 12



Defendant was initially nonresponsive to the Officers’ commands

to drop the gun.   The Officers were placed in a dire position.

Defendant’s actions created a threat to the safety and lives of

Officers Kilduff and Moscaritolo, as well as to the community.

Such threats to the safety of law enforcement and the community

at large cannot be tolerated.

          3.   The Sentence Imposed Must Reflect the Seriousness
               of the Offense

     18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A) further directs a sentencing court

to consider the need for the sentence to reflect the seriousness

of the offense committed.     The crime of possessing a firearm

after having previously been convicted as a felon is a serious

offense by itself.   Add to that the fact that the gun was loaded,

that it was used to threaten a woman’s life, and that the

Defendant attempted to flee from law enforcement officers while

still carrying the loaded firearm and the crime becomes a very

serious offense.   Any sentence less than 65 months’ imprisonment,

would not adequately reflect the serious nature of the

Defendant’s criminal conduct in this matter.

          4.   The Sentence Must Promote Respect for the Law

     Defendant, convicted of not one but two prior felonies,

knowing his action to be illegal, willfully violated by

possessing a dangerous weapon, a firearm.       Further, Defendant has

attempted to flee twice: the first time from the law enforcement

officers on the day he was arrested, and the second time when he

                                   10
     Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 11 of 12



was released on bail and hid his identity to escape from

prosecution and evade future arrest.       Defendant has, thus, shown

an indifference to the law. While Defendants has demonstrated an

acceptance of responsibility for the offense [PSR ¶¶ 26-27], this

is adequately reflected in the Government’s recommended sentence

of 65 months, a recommendation towards the lower end of the

Guideline range.    Anything less than the Guideline recommendation

will not promote respect for the law.

           5.   The Sentence Must Provide Just Punishment for the
                Offense, Afford Adequate Deterrence to Criminal
                Conduct, and Protect the Public from Further
                Crimes of the Defendant

     Adherence to the recommended Guideline sentence will serve

as an adequate deterrent to similar criminal behavior and justly

punish Defendant for his actions. Defendant has two prior felony

convictions for drug-related offenses or crimes of violence.           His

instant offense involved the possession and threatened use of a

dangerous weapon.   Mervil has shown himself to be prone to

violence in the past and such violent tendencies have not been

curbed.   The public needs to be protected from further violent

actions by the Defendant and a sentence of 65 months is adequate

to accomplish this.

                              CONCLUSION

     On October 14, 2007, Defendant, Emmanuel Mervil, a convicted

felon, possessed a loaded firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. §

922(g)(1).   For the above reasons, this Court should sentence

                                   11
     Case 1:08-cr-10101-DJC Document 46 Filed 06/14/13 Page 12 of 12



Defendant to 65 months’ imprisonment, on the lower end of the

Guideline range, three years’ supervised release, and a mandatory

$100 special assessment.



                                        Respectfully submitted,

                                        CARMEN M. ORTIZ
                                        United States Attorney

                                 By:    /s/ Kenneth G. Shine
                                        KENNETH G. SHINE
June 14, 2013                           Assistant U.S. Attorney
                                        (617) 748-3686




                     CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

     This is to certify that I have this day served upon counsel
of record a copy of the foregoing document by electronic filing
notice.

                                        /s/ Kenneth G. Shine
                                        Kenneth G. Shine
                                        Assistant U.S. Attorney




                                   12
