AO 245B (Rev. 11/16) Judgment in a Ci‘iminal Case

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sheet l
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
District of Massachusetts
UN"ITED STATES OF AMER.ICA § JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE
V. )
JAM ES WARN ER § case Number; 1: 16 cR 10161 - 2 - NMG
§ UsM Number; 99630-038
) Robert S. Sinsheimer, Esq.
) Di:l`cnda.ut’s Attorocy
THE DEFENDANT:
id pleaded guilty to count(s) 1 & 2
|:| pleaded nolo contendere to count(s)
which was accepted by the ooiii't.
l:l Was found guilty on count(s)
after a plea of not guilty.
The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these off`enses:
Title & Section Nature of Oft'ense Offense Ended Count
18 USC §922(a)(1)(A) Engaging iri the Business of Dealing in Fireamis without a Licerise 06/08/16 1
is USC §922(g)(1) Feion in Possession afa i=irearm 07/15/15 2
The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 9 of this judgment The sentence is imposed pursuant to
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.
l:l The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s)
l:l Count(s) l:] is m are dismissed on the motion of the United States.

 

_ _ lt is ordered t_hat the defendant_must notify the United States attor_ney for this district within 30 da s of _any change of name, residence,
or mailing address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments imposed l_)y this judgment are fu y paid. If ordered to pay restitution,
the defendant must notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in economic circumstances

9114/201 7
Dalc of imposition of.ludgment

Signature of`]'udge

The Honorable Nathaniel M. Golton
Judge, U.S. District Court

Na.me and Title of Judge

‘jl/'.z§I/l'/

 

 

Date

 

AO 24$B (Rev. 11/16) Jiidgment in Crirninal Case
Sheet 2 _ imprisonment

Judgi'nent-_Pagc _ 2 of
DEFENDANT; JAMES WARNER

CASENUMBER; 1: 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

IMPRISONMENT

The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the Federal Bureau ofPrisons to be imprisoned for a total
term of: 30 month(S)

This term consists of terms of 30 months on Counts 1 & 2, to be served concurrent|y.

El The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau ofPrisons:

See Page 3.

Zl The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.

l:l The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district:
l:l at l:l a.m. [l p.m. on
[:l as notified by the United States Marshal.

 

l] The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons:

l:l before 2 p.m. on

 

l:l as notified by the United States Marshal.

l:l as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.

 

 

 

RETURN
I have executed this judgment as follows:
Defendant delivered on to
a , with a certified copy of this judgment
UNITED STATES MARSHAL
By

 

DEPUTY UNlTED STATES MARSH.AL

AO 245B (Rev. l 1/16) Judgment in a Crimina,l Ce.se
Shcet 2A _ lmprisonment

Judgment-Page 5 of 3

DEFENDANT: JAMES WARNER
CASE NUMBER: 12 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

ADDITIONAL IMPRISONMENT TERMS

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant participate in substance abuse treatment while iri Bureau
of Prisons' custody.

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant participate in vocational training in order help prepare him
to enter the workforce upon release from imprisonment

AO 2458 (Rev. l ll 16) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3 -- Supervised Release

 

il

Judgment-Page 4 of
DEFENDANTZ JAMES WARNER
CASE NUMBERZ 12 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release nom imprisonment, you will be on supervised release for a term of : 3 year(S)

This term consists of terms of 3 years on Counts 1 & 2, to be served concurrent|y.

MANDATORY CONDITIONS

You must not commit another federal, state or local crime.
You must not unlawhilly possess a controlled substance
You must renain from any unlawful use of a controlled substance. Y'ou must submit to one drug test within 15 days of release from
imprisonment and at least two periodic drug tests thereafter, as determined by the court.
l:l The above drug testing condition is suspended, based on the court's determination that you
pose a low risk of future substance abuse. (check ifapplicable)
4. M You must cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (check ifappli¢able)

5~ l:l You must comply with the requirements of the Sex Offender Registration and Notit'ication Act (42 U.S.C. § 16901, et seq.) as
directed by the probation officer, the Bureau of Prisons, or any state sex offender registration agency iri the location where you
reside, work, are a student, or Were convicted of a qualifying offense (¢.-heck ifapplicable)

6. |:I You must participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (check ifappli¢able)

$"’!°!"

You must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court as well as with any other conditions on the attached
page.

AO 245B (Rev. 11/16) Judgment in a Cn'minal Case

Sheet 3A _ Snpervised Rclease

 

il

.ludgment-Page § of

DEFENDANT: JAMES WARNER
cASE NUMBER; 1: 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

As part of your supervised release, you must comply with the following standard conditions of supervision These conditions are imposed
because they establish the basic expectations for your behavior while on supervision and identify the minimum tools needed by probation
officers to keep informed, report to the court about, and bring about improvements in your conduct and condition

l.

!~":'d

ll.
12.

13.

You must report to the probation office in the federal judicial district where you are authorized to reside within 72 hours of your

r&e;;lase nom imprisonment, unless the probation officer instructs you to report to a different probation office or within a different time
e.

After initially reporting to the probation oftice, you will receive instructions from the court or the probation officer about how and

when you must report to the probation officer, and you must report to the probation officer as instructed

You must not knowingly leave the federal judicial district where you are authorized to reside without first getting permission from the

court or the probation officer.

You must answer truthfully the questions asked by your probation officer.

You must live at a place approved by the probation officer. If you plan to change where you live or anything about your living

arrangements (such as the people you live with), you must notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If notifying

the probation officer in advance is not possible due to unanticipated circumstances, you must notify the probation officer within 72

hours of becoming aware of a change or expected change.

You must allow the probation officer to visit you at any time at your horne or elsewhere, and you must permit the probation officer to

take any items prohibited by the conditions of your supervision that he or she observes in plain view.

You must work full time (at least 30 hours per week) at a lawful type of employment, unless the probation officer excuses you from

doing so. If you do not have full-time employment you must try to find full-time employment, unless the probation officer excuses

you from doing so. If you plan to change where you work or anything about your work (such as your position or your job

responsibilities), you must notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If notifying the probation officer at least 10

days in advance is not possible due to unanticipated circumstances, you must notify the probation officer within 72 hours of

becoming aware of a change or expected change.

You must not communicate or interact with someone you know is engaged in criminal activity. If you know someone has been

convicted of a felony, you must not knowingly communicate or interact with that person without first getting the permission of the

probation officer.

If you are arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer, you must notify the probation officer within 72 hours.

You must not own, possess, or have access to a firearm, ammunition, destructive device, or dangerous weapon (i.e., anything that was

designed, or was modified for, the specific purpose of causing bodily injury or death to another person such as nunchakus or tasers).

You must not act or make any agreement with a law enforcement agency to act as a confidential human source or informant without

first getting the permission of the court.

If the probation officer determines that you pose a risk to another person (including an organization), the probation officer may

require you to notify the person about the risk and you must comply with that instruction The probation officer may contact the

person and confirm that you have notified the person about the risk.

You must follow the instructions of the probation ofiicer related to the conditions of supervision

U.S. Probation Office Use Only

A U.S. probation officer has instructed me on the conditions specified by the court and has provided me with a written copy of this
judgment containing these conditions. For iirrther information regarding these conditions, see Overview ofProbation and Supervised
Release Conditions, available at: www.uscourts.gov.

Defendant's Signature Date

 

AO 245B (Rev. 11/16) Judgxnent in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3B - Supervised Releasc

Judgment-Page _/ to of 9

DEFEN'DANT; JAMES WARNER
CASENUMBER: 1: 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

ADDITIONAL SUPERVISED RELEASE TERMS

The Court makes a judicial recommendation that the defendant consider participation in the Probation Oftice's RESTART
program during the term of supervised release if deemed to be an appropriate candidate.

AO 245B(Rev. 11/16) Judgment in a Criminal Case

Sheet SD - Supervised Release
J d r-P ' f g
DEFENDANT: JAMES WARNER “ gm m °

CASENUMBER: 1: 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

1. |f you are ordered by the government to make child support payments, you must make the payments and comply with
the other terms of the order.

2. You are prohibited from consuming any alcoholic beverages.

3. You must participate in a program for substance abuse counseling as directed by the Probation Oftice, which program
may include testing, not to exceed 50 drug tests per year to determine whether you have reverted to the use of alcohol or
drugs.

4. You must participate in a manualized cognitive behavioral treatment program, as directed by the Probation Office. Such
program may include group sessions led by a counselor, or participation in a program administered by the Probation
Office.

5. You must participate in an educational services program. as directed by the Probation Office. Such program may
include GED preparation, Eng|ish as a Second Language classes, and/or other classes designed to improve your
proliciency in skills such as reading, writing, mathematics. and computer use.

6. You must participate in a vocational services training program, as directed by the Probation Oflice. Such program may
include job readiness training and/or skills development training.

7. You shall be required to contribute to the costs of evaluation, treatment, programming, and/or monitoring (see Specia|
Conditions #3-6), based on the ability to pay or availability of third-party payment

Ao 24513 (R¢v. 1 irre) iudgm¢nr in a criminal case
Sheet 5 _ Crirninal Monctary Penaltics

8 s

J d en _P f
DEFENDANT: JAMES WARNER “ S“‘ ‘ “S° ____ ° __
CASENUMBER: 1=16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under the schedule of payments on Sheet 6.

Assessment JVTA Assessment* Fine Restitution
ToTALs $ 200.00 $ $ $
|:l The determination of restitution is deferred until . An Amended Judgmerit in a Cri'mi‘nal Case (A02456) will be entered

after such determination
I:l The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees iri the amount listed below.

If the defendant makes a partial payment, each pa ee shall receive an approximatelji]progoxtioned ayment, unless specified otherwise in
the priority or_der or percentage payment column elow. However, pursuant to 18 .S. . § 3664 i), all nonfederal victims must be paid
before the United States rs paid.

Name of Payee Total Loss** Restitut'ion Ordered Priority or Percentage

0.00

TOTALS $ 0.00 $

Restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement $

The defendant must pay interest on restitution and a fine of more than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
iiiieenth day after the date of the judgment1 pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(t). All of the payment options on Sheet 6 may be subject
to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

l:l The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay interest and it is ordered that:
|:l the interest requirement is waived for the |___l fine |:l restitution

|:l the interest requirement for the Cl fine |Ii restitution is modifiedasfollows:

* Justice for Victims of Trafiickin Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-22. _ _
** Findings for the total amount o losses are required under Chapters 109A, 110, l lOA, and 113A of Title 18 for offenses committed on or
after September 13, 1994, but before Apri123, 1996.

AO 245B (Rev. 11/16) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 6 _ Schedule of Payments

fudgment_Page
DEFENDANT: JAMES WARNER
CASE NUMBER: 1: 16 CR 10167 - 2 - NMG

SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant’s ability to pay, payment of the total criminal monetary penalties is due as follows:

A g Lump sum payment of$ 200.00 due immediately, balance due

|] not later than ,or
|] in accordance with ij C, |:| D, [j E,or |:| Fbelow; or

B l:| Payment to begin immediately (may be combined with l:l C, [] D, or |] F below); or

C |:l Payment in equal (e.g.. weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g., months oryears), to commence (e.g., 30 ar 60 days) after the date of this judgment; or

D l:l Payment in equal (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g.. months or years), to commence (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from imprisonment to a

term of supervision; or

E |'_`| Payment during the term of supervised release will commence within (e.g., 30 ar 60 days) after release from
imprisonment The court will set the payment plan based on an assessment of the defendant’s ability to pay at that time; or

F [] Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penalties:

Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise, if this judgment imposes imprisonment, payment of criminal monetary penalties is due during
th_e period of imprisonment All criminal monetary penalties, except those payments ma e through the Federal Bureau of Prrsons’ Inrnate
Financial Responsibi]ity Program, are made to the clerk of the court.

The defendant shall receive credit for all payments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.

l:l Joint and Several

Defendant and Co-Defendant Names and Case Numbers ancluding defendant number), Total Amount, Joint and Several Amount,
and corresponding payee, if appropriate

l] The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution

l:l

The defendant shall pay the following court cost(s):

El The defendant shall forfeit the defendant’s interest in the following property to the United States:

Payments shall be applied in the following order: (l) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3) restitution interest, (4) fine principal, (5) fine
interest, (6) community restitution, (7) IVTA assessment, (8) penalties, and (9) costs, including cost of prosecution and court costs.

