                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            DISTRICT OF MAINE


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                )
                                        )
      v.                                )     1:14-cr-00034-JAW
                                        )
KEVIN CURTIS ANDERSON                   )


ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR EARLY TERMINATION AND GRANTING
        MOTION FOR ADDITION OF SPECIAL CONDITION
                 OF SUPERVISED RELEASE

      On June 15, 2015, the Court sentenced Kevin Curtis Anderson to twelve

months of incarceration, three years of supervised release, and a $100 special

assessment for violating 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) by being a felon in possession of

firearms. J. (ECF No. 85). Mr. Anderson was released from incarceration and

commenced supervised release on July 18, 2016. He currently resides in the District

of New Jersey.

      On December 28, 2017, Mr. Anderson filed a motion to modify his supervised

release pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e), asserting that he had complied with “each

and every standard and special condition.” Mot. to Modify and Terminate Supervised

Release Attach. 1 (Def.’s Br. in Support of Modification and Termination of Supervised

Release Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. [§] 3583(e) and F[ed.] R. C[iv.] P. 32.1(c) at 2-3) (ECF

No. 88). He states that he has suffered no violations of probation and has successfully

returned to his home and employment. Id. at 3. Mr. Anderson says that he remains

“in strict compliance” with the conditions of supervised release.
       The Government presents a different picture.       On January 25, 2018, the

Government objected to Mr. Anderson’s motion and moved the Court to impose an

additional condition of supervised release, namely that Mr. Anderson have no direct

or indirect contact with the victim of his federal offense or the victim’s family. Mot.

of the United States for the Addition of Special Condition of Supervised Release and

the Gov’t’s Resp. to Def.’s Mot. for Early Termination of Supervised Release (ECF No.

91). Mr. Anderson has elected not to respond to the Government’s motion.

       In light of the fact that the victim’s updated statement is unrefuted, the Court

accepts the victim’s statement of continued harassment as true. Id. Attach. 2 (Letter

from Victim to the Hon. John A. Woodcock, Jr. at 1-2) (Victim Letter). The victim’s

statement is supported by the letter dated January 8, 2018 from Mr. Anderson’s

Probation Officer Bethany Crede, which concludes that Mr. Anderson “appears to

present a safety risk to an identifiable victim.” Id. Attach. 3 (Letter from Bethany

Crede, United States Probation Officer to James M. Moore, Assistant United States

Att’y at 1).

       The Court is chagrined to learn that the Mr. Anderson is continuing to harass

the victim of his state of New Jersey offense. The Court warns Mr. Anderson that

the Court views his conduct in giving the middle finger to the victim, yelling and

swearing at the victim, driving down the victim’s dead end street, and contacting the

victim’s cellphone as serious and wholly unacceptable conduct. Mr. Anderson’s prior

harassment of this State Trooper and his family together with his continuing

misconduct caused the Trooper to rent his home and move away from Mr. Anderson.



                                           2
Victim Letter at 1. Despite the State Trooper’s effort to avoid confrontation, Mr.

Anderson has persisted. Accordingly, the Court has added the additional condition

requested by the Government to protect the victim of the state crime from any such

future actions, which if they occur, will constitute a violation of the conditions of

supervised release and may subject Mr. Anderson to further incarceration. Based on

this intolerable conduct, there is no basis to terminate Mr. Anderson’s supervised

release early.

      The Court DENIES Kevin Curtis Anderson’s Motion to Modify and Terminate

Supervised Release (ECF No. 88) and GRANTS the Government’s Motion of the

United States for the Addition of Special Condition of Supervised Release (ECF No.

91). The Court AMENDS Kevin Curtis Anderson’s special conditions of supervise

release to include the following additional condition:

      The defendant shall neither knowingly have any direct or indirect
      contact with Trooper W. or any member of the family of Trooper W. nor
      shall the defendant knowingly have any verbal, written, telephonic or
      electronic communication with Trooper W. or any family member of
      Trooper W.

      SO ORDERED.


                                        /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                        JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 2nd day of February 2018




                                          3
