                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                       )
                                               )
       v.                                      )      1:16-cr-00152-JAW
                                               )
REGINALD McBRIDE                               )


                           ORDER ON MOTIONS IN LIMINE

        With trial looming, the Government filed three motions in limine. Although

the justification of self-defense is not available to a defendant charged with being a

felon in possession of a firearm, the Court concludes that the Defendant may put the

Government to its proof to establish that his use and possession of the firearm was

during and in relation to and in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime. The Court

grants the Government’s motions in limine to permit the Government to introduce

evidence that the Defendant was a prohibited person at the time of his possession

and use of the firearm and that the firearm was stolen in order to support its case

that the Defendant possessed and used the firearm during and in relation to and in

furtherance of a drug trafficking crime. The Court holds in abeyance other related

evidentiary issues until presented in the specific context of the trial.

I.     BACKGROUND

       On November 10, 2016, a federal grand jury issued an indictment against

Kweasia1 McBride alleging that he committed a federal crime: being a prohibited



1       The indictments refer to the Defendant as Reginald McBride with a number of aliases,
including Kweasia McBride. In his response, Mr. McBride refers to himself as Kweasia McBride and
the Court has therefore used Mr. McBride’s preferred first name in the body of the opinion, though the
captions of the indictments have not been changed.
person in possession of a firearm, an alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).

Indictment (ECF No. 1). The asserted basis for his prohibition was the commission

of five prior felonies. Id. at 1-2. On February 15, 2017, a federal grand jury issued a

superseding indictment against Mr. McBride, alleging that in addition to the felon in

possession of a firearm charge, he committed two other federal crimes: (1) possession

with the intent to distribute heroin, an alleged violation of 21 U.S.C. §841(b)(1)(C),

and (2) carrying and discharging a firearm during and in relation to and in

furtherance of a drug trafficking crime, an alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. §

924(c)(1)(A)(iii). Superseding Indictment (ECF No. 24). On November 8, 2017, a

federal grand jury issued a second superseding indictment, striking an allegation in

the superseding indictment about a 1998 conviction in the state of New York for

criminal possession of a weapon in the fourth degree as constituting a predicate

felony, but leaving the allegation that Mr. McBride had committed the remaining

four felonies before his alleged June 26, 2016 possession of a firearm.           Second

Superseding Indictment at 1-2 (ECF No. 48). On January 23, 2018, the case was

scheduled for jury trial beginning on March 8, 2018 with jury selection on March 6,

2018. Notice of Hr’g (ECF No. 69, 70).

      On November 9, 2017, the Government filed three motions in limine. Gov’t’s

First Set of Mots. in Limine (ECF No. 51) (Gov’t’s First Mot.); Gov’t’s Second Mot. in

Limine (ECF No. 54) (Gov’t’s Second Mot.); Gov’t’s Third Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 55)

(Gov’t’s Third Mot.). On December 8, 2017, Mr. McBride responded to the first motion

in limine. Def.’s Resp. to Gov’t’s First Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 65) (Def.’s First Resp.).



                                            2
On November 30, 2017, he responded to the Government’s second and third motions

in limine. Def.’s Resp. to Gov’t’s Second & Third Mots. in Limine (ECF No. 61) (Def.’s

Second & Third Resp.). The Government replied to Mr. McBride’s responses on

December 13, 2017 and December 21, 2017 respectively. Gov’t’s Reply to Def.’s Resp.

to Gov’t’s Second & Third Mots. in Limine (ECF No. 67) (Gov’t’s Second & Third

Replies); Gov’t’s Reply to Def.’s Resp. to Gov’t’s First Mot. in Limine (ECF No. 68)

(Gov’t’s First Reply).

II.    THE FACTS

       A.     The Government’s Proffered Evidence

       In its memorandum, the Government proffered:

       On June 26, 2016, Mr. McBride was the passenger in a Ford Taurus car and a

female drove him in the Ford to a Walmart store in Augusta, Maine. Gov’t’s First

Mot. at 2. A Volkswagen car followed the Ford to the Walmart parking lot. Id. Once

the Ford and Volkswagen arrived at the parking lot, there was a dispute between the

occupants of both vehicles. Id. During the dispute, Mr. McBride grabbed his firearm,

a Kel-Tec 9 mm pistol and fired multiple rounds at a male who had traveled to the

Walmart in the Volkswagen. Id. The male at whom Mr. McBride fired his pistol,

fired shots back at Mr. McBride. Id. After Mr. McBride fired the Kel-Tec pistol at

the other male, Mr. McBride threw the pistol on the ground. Id. Mr. McBride then

became involved in a physical altercation with the other male and with a female who

had been in the Volkswagen.      Id. at 2-3.   The altercation took place near the

Volkswagen and Ford cars. Id. at 3.



                                          3
      After the altercation, Mr. McBride got back into the Ford and the female driver

drove from the Walmart parking lot with him. Id. Police officers followed the Ford

and stopped it in a residential driveway. Id. Officers approached the female driver

and Mr. McBride and detained them. Id. Officers found suspected heroin in Mr.

McBride’s possession and a laboratory screening confirmed that the substance was

heroin and that it weighed 40.991 grams. Id.

      After the shooting on June 26, 2016, officers conducted a Mirandized interview

of Mr. McBride. Id. Mr. McBride admitted possessing the pistol he discharged in the

Walmart parking lot, discharging the pistol multiple times, and throwing it on the

ground. Id. Mr. McBride admitted that the pistol he fired was his pistol, that he

pulled out the pistol during the dispute, and that he purchased the pistol. Id. He

claimed that he had bought the pistol legally. Id.

      On July 6, 2016, officers executed a search warrant on the Ford.            Id.

Underneath the passenger seat where Mr. McBride had been sitting, officers located

a loaded, Imperial Metal Products, model 7, .22 caliber revolver. Id. In the trunk,

officers found a Jennings, model 38, .32 caliber firearm and a Cobra Enterprises of

Utah, Inc. model C22M, .22 caliber firearm. Id. Also in the trunk, officers found

multiple scales, ammunition, and a firearms speed loader. Id.

      Before June 26, 2016, Mr. McBride was prohibited from possessing firearms

because he had multiple felony convictions. Id. at 3-4. Officers discovered that the

Kel-Tec pistol had been stolen and that Mr. McBride was not the original purchaser

of the Kel-Tec. Id. at 4.



                                          4
III.   THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

       A.     The First Motion in Limine: Self-Defense

              1.      The Government’s Motion

       In the Government’s first motion in limine, the Government seeks to prevent

Mr. McBride from presenting evidence of self-defense to the charge in Count One of

the second superseding indictment, the felon in possession charge, because in its view

self-defense is not a legal justification to the charge of being a felon in possession of a

firearm.    Id. at 4-6. Similarly, the Government seeks an order prohibiting Mr.

McBride from presenting evidence of self-defense to the charge in Count Three of the

second superseding indictment, the carrying and using a firearm during and in

relation to a drug trafficking offense, possessing the firearm in furtherance of the

drug trafficking crime, and discharging the firearm. Id. at 7-10.

              2.      Kweasia McBride’s Response

       In his response, Mr. McBride confirms that he does not intend to assert self-

defense as a defense to Counts One and Three. Def.’s First Resp. at 1. In his words,

he “does not intend to argue at trial that the circumstances justified the Defendant

in having ‘carried and used during and in relation to . . . .’” Id. at 2. Nor does he

“argue that the circumstances justified the Defendant in having ‘possessed [a firearm]

in furtherance of . . . .’” Id.

       Nevertheless, Mr. McBride does intend to put the Government to its proof on

whether he carried and used a firearm “during and in relation to a drug trafficking

crime,” id. at 2, and whether he “possessed [a firearm] in furtherance of” a drug

trafficking crime.     Id.   In other words, Mr. McBride intends to argue that his

                                            5
possession and use of the firearms were related not to a drug trafficking offense but

“as a necessary response under the circumstances for protection of self or another.”

Id.

             3.     The Government’s Reply

       The Government objects to Mr. McBride’s response. Gov’t’s Reply at 1-5. In

the Government’s view, Mr. McBride’s position is simply a self-defense argument in

a different guise. Id. at 1. It reiterates that self-defense is not a legal justification

for either the felon in possession or possession and use charges. Id. at 1-2. The

Government points to United States v. Palumbo, 468 Fed. Appx. 751, 752 (9th Cir.

2012) (unpublished) in which the Ninth Circuit wrote that “[t]he sentencing

enhancement for discharge, 18 U.S.C. §924(c)(1)(A)(iii), does not require the

discharge to be in furtherance of the drug offense. It requires only that the defendant

possessed the gun in furtherance of a drug offense.” Gov’t’s Reply at 3. Accordingly,

the Government says that the Defendant’s attempt to explain his misconduct is

irrelevant. Id. at 2. The Government recites the anticipated evidence and argues

that “[w]hen the defendant discharged the firearm, he had already committed and

was continuing to commit the offense of carrying and using a firearm during and in

relation to, and possessing the firearm in furtherance of, the drug trafficking offense.”

Id. at 4.




                                           6
      B.     The Second and Third Motions in Limine: Stolen Firearm and
             Felony Status

             1.     The Government’s Motion

      In its second motion in limine, the Government represents that the Kel-Tec 9

mm pistol that it alleges Mr. McBride possessed and used on June 26, 2016 was

stolen. Gov’t’s Second Mot. at 1. The Government says that during its investigation

into this case, it determined that the Kel-Tec was reported stolen on January 21,

2016. Id. The Government states that Mr. McBride was not the original purchaser

of the firearm. Id. at 1. The Government cites caselaw which it argues stands for the

proposition that the fact a firearm is stolen is admissible to prove a § 924(c) case. Id.

at 2. Finally, it notes that it should be allowed to introduce this evidence to counter

Mr. McBride’s statement to the police that he had purchased the Kel-Tec legally. Id.

      In its third motion in limine, the Government maintains that it should be

allowed to argue to the jury that Mr. McBride’s “status as a convicted felon is relevant

in determining whether he is guilty of violating 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) as charged in Count

3 of the Second Superseding Indictment.” Gov’t’s Third Mot. at 1. The Government

cites caselaw from the Third and Fifth Circuits that states that a jury should be

allowed to consider whether a defendant’s possession of a firearm was legitimate or

illegal in determining whether the Government has met its burden on the § 924(c)

charge. Id. at 2. Similarly, the Government says that it should be permitted to argue

the illegality of his possession in response to his statement to the police after the

incident that he legally purchased the firearm. Id.




                                           7
             2.     Kweasia McBride’s Response

      Mr. McBride incorporates his response to the second and third motions in one

response because they raise similar issues. Mr. McBride concedes that under Fifth

Circuit law, whether a firearm was stolen and whether a defendant could legally

possess a firearm have been deemed relevant to a § 924(c) charge. Def.’s Second &

Third Resp. at 1-2. However, Mr. McBride reviews First Circuit law and contends

that the First Circuit has not directly adopted the Fifth Circuit’s rule. Id. at 2-3. Mr.

McBride notes that in United States v. Sherman, 551 F.3d 45, 50 (1st Cir. 2008), the

First Circuit listed certain properly-considered factors but did not include whether

the firearm was stolen. Def.’s Second & Third Resp. at 2; see Sherman, 551 F.3d at

50 (“[T]his court has acknowledged a number of factors that the trier of fact may

consider including ‘whether the firearm was loaded, whether the firearm was easily

accessible, the proximity of the firearm to the drugs, and the surrounding

circumstances’”) (quoting United States v. Robinson, 473 F.3d 387, 400 (1st Cir.

2007)).

      He acknowledges that in United States v. Felton, 417 F.3d 97, 105 (1st Cir.

2005), the First Circuit quoted a district court jury instruction on a § 924(c) case that

included reference to whether the firearm was stolen as a factor for jury

consideration, but Mr. McBride says that the § 924(c) instruction was not challenged

on appeal. Def.’s Second & Third Resp. at 2-3. He also admits that in United States

v. Marin, 523 F.3d 24, 28 (1st Cir. 2008), the First Circuit concluded that the fact a

firearm had an obliterated serial number was properly considered by a jury in a §

924(c) case. Def.’s Second & Third Resp. at 3.
                                           8
      Mr. McBride maintains that evidence the weapon was stolen would be unfairly

prejudicial to him. Id. at 3. Similarly, Mr. McBride argues that evidence of any of

his prior felony convictions would be unfairly prejudicial. Id. He also says that an

inquiry into the “stolen weapon factor”:

      invites inquiry into additional facts irrelevant to this case, including:
      how the Defendant came into possession of the weapon, when the
      Defendant came into possession of the weapon in relation to its stolen
      status, whether the Defendant had involvement in the theft of the gun
      and whether the Defendant had any subjective awareness of the stolen
      status of the gun.

Id. at 4. Mr. McBride worries that the trial of the § 924(c) charge “could turn into a

firearm theft trial as a companion, and tangentially-related matter.” Id. Even if the

jury may consider whether the firearm was stolen as a factor under § 924(c), Mr.

McBride urges the Court to view the evidence as “not automatically admissible” and

to consider “rules-based objections” and issue rulings as they arise. Id. at 5.

             3.     The Government’s Reply

      In reply, the Government urges the Court to reject Mr. McBride’s invitation to

disregard the factors in United States v. Ceballos-Torres, 218 F.3d 409, 413-16 (5th

Cir. 2000), a Fifth Circuit case. Gov’t’s Second & Third Replies at 1-2. Furthermore,

the Government contends that Mr. McBride has misinterpreted First Circuit

precedent on the stolen firearm issue. Id. at 2-3. It argues that in Sherman, the First

Circuit “neither rejected the factors set forth in Ceballos-Torres nor did it cite

Ceballos-Torres unfavorably.” Id. at 3. The Government says that the First Circuit’s

Felton and Marin decisions support the Government’s position. Id. at 3-4. The

Government cites other circuits that have agreed with the Fifth Circuit. Id. at 4. The


                                           9
Government explains its view of the probative value of the fact the firearm was stolen:

“The fact that the defendant was unlawfully possessing the pistol at the time he was

engaging in drug trafficking is inconsistent with mere innocent possession.” Id. at 5.

In addition, “[t]he fact that the pistol was stolen demonstrates that the defendant

was not possessing the pistol for lawful or innocent purposes . . .” and “supports the

fact that the defendant was possessing the pistol to further his drug trafficking

activity.” Id.

      Acknowledging that evidence of the stolen nature of the firearm would be

prejudicial to Mr. McBride, the Government asserts it would not be unfairly

prejudicial. Id. at 5-6. The Government also notes that evidence of his “prohibited

status” would be admissible and particularly so, because Mr. McBride told the officers

that his possession was in fact legal, which demonstrates in the Government’s view

“consciousness of guilt.” Id. at 6-7.

      The Government brushes aside Mr. McBride’s worries about a trial within a

trial. Id. at 7. The Government apparently plans to introduce only the fact that the

firearm was stolen; it does not intend to introduce evidence that Mr. McBride stole it

or how Mr. McBride came to possess it. Id. (“[T]he applicable inquiry is whether the

pistol was stolen, not how the defendant came into possession of it”).

IV.   DISCUSSION

      A.     The First Motion in Limine

      The Court agrees with Mr. McBride on the admissibility of evidence of why he

carried and discharged a firearm on June 26, 2016. To prove Count Three, the

Government must prove two elements: (1) that Mr. McBride committed the drug

                                          10
trafficking charge in Count Two; and (2) that he “knowingly used or carried a firearm

during and in relation to” the drug trafficking crime alleged in Count Two and that

he possessed the Kel-Tec pistol in furtherance of the drug trafficking crime.” See

Judge Nancy Torresen, PATTERN CRIMINAL JURY INSTRUCTIONS            FOR THE   DISTRICT

COURTS   OF THE   FIRST CIRCUIT § 4.18.924 (updated Dec. 15, 2017). The indictment

also charges that Mr. McBride discharged the firearm.            Second Superseding

Indictment (ECF No. 48).

      Regarding the “during and in relation to” element, the First Circuit endorsed

as adequate and accurate a jury instruction:

      The words “during and in relation to” are to be given their plain and
      customary meaning. The phrase “in relation to” is expansive. At a
      minimum it means that the firearm must have had some purpose or
      effect with respect to the drug trafficking crime. If a firearm is present
      simply as a result of coincidence or accident it cannot be said that it was
      used or carried in relation to the drug traffic[king] offense. The firearm
      must have facilitated or have had the potential to facilitate the drug
      offense.

United States v. Roberson, 459 F.3d 39, 44-46 (1st Cir. 2006). The term, “during and

in relation to” a drug trafficking offense has been “interpreted capaciously.” United

States v. De La Paz-Rentas, 613 F.3d 18, 27-28 (1st Cir. 2010). It “still requires at a

minimum that the firearm had “some purpose or effect with respect to the drug

trafficking crime.” Id. at 28 (quoting Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223, 238

(1993)). The “possession . . . in furtherance” language requires the Government to

demonstrate that the defendant possessed the firearm “to advance or promote the

commission of the underlying offense.” United States v. Delgado-Hernandez, 420 F.3d

16, 25 (1st Cir. 2005) (quoting H.R.Rep. No. 105-344, at 11 (1997)).


                                          11
      To illustrate why the Court concludes that Mr. McBride will be allowed to

present evidence and argue to the jury that the Government failed to meet its burden

on Count Three, assume that the Government is able to prove that Mr. McBride was

involved in drug trafficking, but the evidence also shows that Mr. McBride knew the

male occupant of the Volkswagen to be a violent, nasty and dangerous person who

usually carried a firearm and who held a longstanding grudge against Mr. McBride

unrelated to drug trafficking. Further assume that when they encountered each

other in the parking lot, Mr. McBride and the other male engaged in a war of words,

not over drugs, but over something else. Finally, assume that the evidence also

demonstrated that although Mr. McBride pulled out and shot his Kel-Tec, he did not

do so because of drugs but because he feared the other male.

      In these circumstances, Mr. McBride would clearly be allowed to present

evidence of an alternative reason for his firearm possession and use, and to argue to

a jury that the Government had not established all the elements of Count Three.

Although Mr. McBride’s argument has aspects similar to self-defense, it remains the

Government’s burden to prove that Mr. McBride’s possession and use of the firearm

were linked to the drug trafficking offense and not to some other cause. There are

some outer limits to allowing a defendant to argue a theory of the case wholly

unsupported by the evidence, but at this stage, the Court does not know all the

evidence the parties, particularly Mr. McBride, will introduce at trial on this precise

subject.   The Court is not in a position to rule out evidence in anticipation of trial

when it does not know what that evidence will be.



                                          12
      Finally, in his response, Mr. McBride stated that he

      would not object to a limiting instruction at the appropriate time
      explaining to the jury that if it finds a firearm discharge occurred they
      can consider the circumstances surrounding the discharge as relevant
      to whether the Government can successfully prove that the Defendant
      “used and carried during and in relation to” or “possessed in furtherance
      of” a drug trafficking crime and that the jury is not asked to decide
      whether self-defense or defense of others principles apply.”

Def.’s First Resp. at 3-4. The Court directs counsel to consult each other to determine

whether such an instruction should be given and, if so, the proper language of the

instruction.

      B.       The Second and Third Motions in Limine

      Regarding the first issue — whether the fact that a firearm is stolen is a factor

that a jury may consider in evaluating a § 924(c) charge — the Court agrees with the

Government. The Court begins with United States v. Luciano, 329 F.3d 1 (1st Cir.

2003), where the First Circuit first cited Ceballos-Torres. Luciano, 329 F.3d at 6. In

Luciano, the First Circuit observed that to prove a § 924(c) charge, the Government

must prove “a sufficient nexus between the drug trafficking crime and the firearms.”

Id. The First Circuit described a number of factors relevant to the nexus in that case,

including: (1) the value of the drugs, and (2) the fact that drug dealers often use

firearms to protect drug stockpiles, to prevent encroachment by other dealers, and for

retaliation. Id. The Luciano Court concluded that the “close proximity of the firearms

and the loaded magazines to the significant stockpile of heroin” was sufficient to

establish a nexus between the possession of the firearm and the drug trafficking. Id.;

see also United States v. Garner, 338 F.3d 78, 81 (1st Cir. 2003).



                                          13
       In United States v. Carlos Cruz, 352 F.3d 499 (1st Cir. 2003), the First Circuit

quoted with approval the language in Ceballos-Torres, where the Fifth Circuit

included “whether the weapon was stolen” among the factors a jury could consider

under § 924(c). Id. at 509-10 (quoting Ceballos-Torres, 218 F.3d at 415).

      The First Circuit next cited Ceballos-Torres in United States v. Grace, 367 F.3d

29 (1st Cir. 2004). In Grace, the First Circuit discussed Ceballos-Torres in footnote 5

and wrote in part:

      After noting that the gun in that case was loaded, accessible, and stored
      in an apartment with drugs and that the defendant acquired the gun
      illegally, the Ceballos court concluded that the gun protected the
      defendant’s drugs and money against robbery and, therefore, that the
      defendant’s possession of the gun furthered his drug trafficking.

Id. at 35 n.5 (emphasis supplied).

      In 2005, the First Circuit quoted a trial judge’s jury instructions on a § 924(c)

charge, which expressly included a reference to whether the firearm was stolen as a

proper factor for jury consideration, and did not suggest that the instruction was

incorrect. Felton, 417 F.3d at 104-05. The Felton Court compared a § 924(c) case with

the “paradigm case of a weapon purchased for some innocent purpose that happened

to be stored near the crime.” Id. at 106.

      In Robinson, a 2007 case, the First Circuit used general language in discussing

the factors a jury may consider in a § 924(c) case: “[W]hether the firearm was loaded,

whether the firearm was easily accessible, the proximity of the firearm to the drugs,

and the surrounding circumstances.” Id. at 399-400. In Marin, the First Circuit

observed that a jury could consider “that the gun had an obliterated serial number

and that [the defendant] admitted that he purchased the gun from another cocaine
                                            14
dealer” as supporting “an inference that he subjectively intended to possess the

weapon in furtherance of the underlying drug crime.” 523 F.3d at 28.

      Finally, in Sherman, the First Circuit wrote that the “in furtherance” element

“does not have a settled, inelastic, definition.” 551 F.3d at 50 (quoting Marin, 523

F.3d at 27).   The First Circuit has analyzed the issue from both objective and

subjective standpoints. Id. As regards the objective analysis, the Sherman Court

stated:

      Applying the objective analysis, this court has acknowledged a number
      of factors that the trier of fact may consider including “whether the
      firearm was loaded, whether the firearm was easily accessible, the
      proximity of the firearm to the drugs, and the surrounding
      circumstances. Id. (quoting Robinson, 473 F.3d at 400); see also Felton,
      417 F.3d at 105 (type of weapon and legality of possession”) . . . .

Id. (emphasis supplied).

      The most that can be said of Mr. McBride’s argument is that the First Circuit

has not expressly held that the legality of a defendant’s possession of a firearm may

be considered by a jury in evaluating a § 924(c) charge, but it has all but said it.

Furthermore, in reviewing the § 924(c) cases that the First Circuit has decided, the

fact patterns have not directly presented a case where this issue has been raised.

Moreover, all the other circuits that have considered the issue have ruled in favor of

admissibility. United States v. Snow, 462 F.3d 55, 62 n.6 (2d Cir. 2012); United States

v. Walker, 657 F.3d 160, 172 (3d Cir. 2011); United States v. Moore, 769 F.3d 264, 270

(4th Cir. 2014); United States v. Combs, 369 F.3d 925, 933 (6th Cir. 2004) (citing

United States v. Mackey, 265 F.3d 457, 462 (6th Cir. 2001)); United States v. Brown,

724 F.3d 801, 803 (7th Cir. 2013) (citing whether the weapon is stolen as among the


                                          15
“canonical factors”); United States v. Mosely, 465 F.3d 412, 415-16 (9th Cir. 2006)

(observing that the Ninth Circuit has rejected a ‘checklist’ approach but stating that

whether a firearm is unregistered is an appropriate factor to consider); United States

v. Bustos, 303 F. Appx. 656, 668 (10th Cir. 2008) (“[W]e . . . continue to hold illegal

firearm possession is a relevant factor in determining whether possession of a firearm

or ammunition was in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime”); United States v.

Woodard, 531 F.3d 1352, 1362 (11th Cir. 2008). By contrast, Mr. McBride has offered

no authority from any jurisdiction that has accepted his position.

      As to the relevance and probative value, Mr. McBride’s argument does not pass

the common sense test. Assume that Mr. McBride were legally entitled to possess a

firearm, that he had gone to a local federally-licensed firearms dealer and properly

purchased the firearm, that he had assiduously kept it under lock and key, and that

he had routinely used it at a local gun range in target shooting. Certainly this

cumulative evidence would be admissible to allow an inference that his possession

was a “paradigm case of a weapon purchased for some innocent purpose that

happened to be stored near the crime.” Felton, 417 F.3d at 106. But the opposite

must also be true. If, as the Government alleges in this case, the firearm was stolen

and if, as the Government alleges, Mr. McBride could not legally possess a firearm to

begin with, a jury should be allowed to consider these factors as part of the

“surrounding circumstances” of his possession and use of the firearm. See Robinson,

473 F.3d at 400.




                                          16
      Regarding unfair prejudice, Mr. McBride has a point about how much of this

evidence comes before a jury.     The wrinkle in this case is that Mr. McBride is

contesting whether he was a prohibited person at the time of his firearm possession

on June 26, 2016. See Old Chief v. United States, 519 U.S. 172, 174 (1997) (concluding

that when a defendant offered to stipulate that he had been convicted of a crime

punishable by imprisonment exceeding one year, the district court abused its

discretion in admitting his actual record of conviction because of its discounted

probative value was substantially outweighed by the risk of unfair prejudice). In his

trial brief, he acknowledges his right to “pursue the approach established by the

courts as a result of the case Old Chief v. U.S.” Def.’s Trial Br. at 3 (ECF No. 74).

Nevertheless, “he disputes that he is a prohibited person. He is aware that the prior

conviction evidence of the Government will be presented on this issue of fact.” Id.

      In its trial brief, the Government indicated its intention to introduce into

evidence certified court records of four prior felony convictions: Possession of a

Controlled Drug (State of Virginia, Circuit Court of Fairfax County), Forging a Public

Record (State of Virginia, Circuit Court of Fairfax County), Distribution of Cocaine,

(State of Virginia, Circuit Court of the City of Alexandria), and Criminal Possession

of a Weapon in the Third Degree (Supreme Court of New York, New York County).

Gov’t’s Trial Br. at 3, 9 (ECF No. 75).

      The Court assumes that based on Mr. McBride’s recently-made strategic

decision to contest whether he was a prohibited person at the time of the June 26,

2016 incident and on his acknowledgement that the Government will be allowed to



                                          17
introduce evidence of the actual prior convictions, his earlier-expressed objection to

any evidence of the actual nature of his prior convictions has been significantly

eclipsed by his current position.      This development substantially mitigates the

potential prejudice of referencing his prior convictions. While Mr. McBride has the

right to object to evidence the Government offers, it remains to be seen what is left of

objectionable evidence, given the fact the jury is likely to learn about the exact nature,

if not the details, of his alleged prior convictions.

       Regarding the stolen firearm evidence, the Court gathers that the Government

intends to present evidence, presumably through the original purchaser and legal

owner of the Kel-Tec, that the weapon had been stolen from the true owner. The

Government does not intend to present further evidence as to how Mr. McBride

himself came into possession of the firearm. Gov’t’s Second & Third Replies at 7. As

explained, the Court views this evidence as permissible under First Circuit guidance

and the prejudicial impact against Mr. McBride as relatively benign, because the

Government is not asserting that he stole the firearm or that he came into possession

of the firearm knowing it was stolen.

       In view of the narrow set of evidence the Government wishes to present, the

First Circuit’s approval of the jury’s consideration of evidence of the stolen nature of

the firearm, and the absence of any specificity as to potential prejudice beyond the

inherent prejudice from any evidence of a stolen firearm, the Court’s Federal Rule of

Evidence 403 balancing analysis favors admission of the evidence the Government

has proffered. If the parties, particularly Mr. McBride, wish to present the jury with



                                            18
a limiting instruction for the Court to give the jury at the time of the admission of

this evidence, they should feel free to do so. If the Government wishes to present a

broader range of evidence of the stolen nature of the firearm, counsel for the

Government will have to approach the bench before doing so.

V.     CONCLUSION

       The Court GRANTS in part and DISMISSES in part the Government’s First

Set of Motions in Limine (ECF No. 51). The Court GRANTS the Government’s motion

insofar as it contends that the Defendant will not be allowed to assert the defense of

self-defense to Count One, the felon in possession charge; the Court DISMISSES the

Government’s motion insofar as it relates to Count Three, the during and in relation

to and possession in furtherance of charge, because more facts are necessary to make

a final ruling.

       The Court GRANTS the Government’s Second Motion in Limine (ECF No. 54)

and the Government’s Third Motion in Limine (ECF No. 55). The Court concludes

that evidence that the Defendant’s possession of the Kel-Tec pistol was illegal and

that the Kel-Tec pistol was stolen is admissible at trial. The Court withholds further

rulings on these issues until specific evidence is presented at trial.

       SO ORDERED.



                                         /s/ John A. Woodcock, Jr.
                                         JOHN A. WOODCOCK, JR.
                                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

Dated this 5th day of March, 2018



                                           19
