Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Pagelof6 PagelD #: 198

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
v. No. 1:22-cr-00050-LEW

XAVIER PELKEY

 

AGREEMENT TO PLEAD GUILTY
(WITH STIPULATIONS AND APPEAL WAIVER)

The United States of America, by and through Darcie N. McElwee, United States
Attorney for the District of Maine, and Craig M. Wolff, Assistant United States Attorney;
and Xavier Pelkey (hereinafter “Defendant”), acting for himself and through his counsel,
Christopher K. MacLean, Esquire, enter into the following Agreement based upon the
promises and understandings set forth below.

1. Guilty Plea/Dismissal of Counts

Defendant agrees to plead guilty to Count One of the pending Superseding
Indictment herein pursuant to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (Fed.
R. Crim. P.). Count One charges Defendant with conspiracy to provide material support
to terrorists, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2339A. The United States agrees that it will move
to dismiss Count Two of the Superseding Indictment pursuant to Rule 1A(0)(4)(A) at the
time of sentencing. The parties agree and understand that if the Court should deny that
motion to dismiss, the provisions of Rule 11(c)(5) will apply.

2, Sentencing /Penalties

Defendant agrees to be sentenced on the charge described above. Defendant
understands that the penalties that are applicable to the charge are as follows:

A. A maximum prison term of 15 years;

 

 

 

 

 
Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Page2of6 PagelD #: 199

B. A maximum fine of $250,000;

C. A mandatory special assessment of $100.00 which Defendant
agrees to pay at or before the time that he enters a guilty plea;

D. A term of supervised release of up to life, under 18 U.S.C. § 3583()).
Defendant understands that his failure to comply with any of the
conditions of supervised release may result in revocation of
supervised release, requiring Defendant to serve up to 2 additional

years in prison for any such revocation of supervised release
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583.

3. Agreements Regarding Sentencing
The parties agree to make the non-binding recommendation that the Court find
that Defendant has accepted responsibility for the offense of conviction, and that the

Court should reduce Defendant’s Adjusted Offense Level pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1.

 

The Government reserves the right not to recommend a reduction under U.S.S.G.

§ 3E1.1 if, at any time between his execution of this Agreement and sentencing,

 

Defendant: (a) fails to admit a complete factual basis for the plea; (b) fails to truthfully
admit his conduct in the offense of conviction; (c) engages in conduct which results in
an adjustment under U.S.S.G. § 3C1.1; (d) falsely denies or frivolously contests relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under U.S.S.G. § 1B1.3 or previous
convictions that Defendant has sustained; or (e) engages in new criminal conduct.
Defendant understands that he may not withdraw the guilty plea if, for any of the
reasons listed above, the Government does not recommend that he receive a reduction
in Offense Level for acceptance of responsibility.

The parties expressly agree and understand that should the Court reject the above

 

recommendation of the parties, Defendant will not thereby be permitted to withdraw his

plea of guilty. The parties agree and understand that the Court has the discretion to

 

impose any lawful sentence.

 
Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Page 3o0f6 PagelD #: 200

4, Appeal Waivers
Defendant is aware that Title 18, United States Code, Section 3742 affords a

defendant the right to appeal the sentence imposed. Knowing that, Defendant waives
the right to appeal the following:

A, Defendant’s guilty plea and any other aspect of his conviction in the

above-captioned case; and

B. Asentence of imprisonment that does not exceed 180 months. The
number of months mentioned in this paragraph does not necessarily constitute an
estimate of the sentence that the parties expect will be imposed.

Defendant’s waiver of his right to appeal shall not apply to appeals based on a

 

right that has been newly recognized by the Supreme Court and made retroactively
applicable to cases on collateral review.

5. New Criminal Conduct

Defendant agrees that he will not commit any other federal or state crime.

6. Consequences of Breach

If Defendant violates or fails to perform any obligations under this Agreement (“a
breach”), the United States will be released from its obligations hereunder, including its

obligations to make any sentencing recommendations under Paragraph 4, and may fully

 

prosecute Defendant on all criminal charges that can be brought against Defendant.

 

With respect to such a prosecution:

A. The United States may use any statement that Defendant made
pursuant to this Agreement, including statements made during plea discussions and
plea colloquies, and the fact that Defendant pleaded guilty, and Defendant hereby

waives any claim under Rule 410 of the Federal Rules of Evidence or Rule 11(f) of the

3

 
Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Page 4of6 PagelD #: 201

Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure that such statements and guilty plea are

inadmissible.

B. - Defendant waives any and all defenses based on the statute of

limitations with respect to any such prosecution that is not time-barred on the date that

 

this Agreement is signed by the parties.

If the United States chooses to exercise its rights under this paragraph, the
determination of whether Defendant has committed a breach shall be made by the Court
upon an appropriate motion. In a proceeding on such motion, the United States shall
have the burden to establish Defendant’s breach by a preponderance of the evidence.

7. Speedy Trial Waiver

Defendant agrees to waive, and hereby does waive, any and all rights he might
have under the Speedy Trial Act, 18 U.S.C. 88 3161—64, from the date of the execution of

this Agreement and continuing thereafter through and including the date upon which

 

sentence is imposed. In the event that the Court determines that Defendant has

breached this Agreement, as set forth in Paragraph 6 of this Agreement, then the waiver

 

described in this Paragraph shall continue through and including the date on which the
Court determines that such a breach has occurred. Defendant expressly consents to the
entry of an Order by the Court excluding such periods of time from such consideration.

8. Forfeiture

 

Defendant agrees to waive any claim to, and assist the United States in effecting
the forfeiture or other transfer of, any property that may be subject to forfeiture to the
United States under any law of the United States, including, but not limited to:

a. The three destructive devices seized from his residence on about

February 11, 2022;

 

 
Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Page5of6 PagelD #: 202

b. One Moto G7 Optimo Maxx mobile telephone, IMEI
359529092895171; and
Cc. One TCL mobile telephone, IMEI 015423006105438.
9. Validity of Other Agreements; Signature
This Agreement supersedes any prior understandings, promises, or conditions
between the United States and Defendant. However, in the event that Defendant fails to
enter his guilty plea or is allowed to withdraw his guilty plea entered hereunder, and the
Court determines that Defendant has not breached this Agreement, then any proffer

agreement between the parties shall remain in effect. No additional understandings,

 

promises, or conditions will be entered into unless in writing and signed by all parties.

The signature of Defendant in the space designated signifies his full and voluntary

acceptance of this Agreement.

 

 

 
Case 1:22-cr-O0050-LEW Document 71 Filed 03/29/23 Page 6of6 PagelD #: 203

I have read this Agreement and have carefully reviewed every part of it. I
understand it and I have voluntarily agreed to it.

 

ms

   

 

Date: ~ i * Ff : / Ang Sy ‘
Xavier Pelkey
Defendant

I am legal counsel for Xavier Pelkey. I have carefully reviewed every part of this
Agreement with Mr. Pelkey. To my knowledge, Mr. Pelkey’s decision to enter into this
Agreement is an informed and voluntary one.

LY

&
é

Christopher K. MacLean, Esq.
Attorney for Defendant

 

  

 

FOR THE UNITED STATES: Darcie N. McElwee
United States Attorney

Date:__1 las les Co No I
Craig M. Wolff C)
Assistant U\S. Attorney

Supervisory Assistant USs-atterney

 
