Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 1 of 7             PageID #: 191




                      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           DISTRICT OF MAINE

   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

             v.                                  No. 1:22-cr-00050-LEW

   XAVIER PELKEY


                            PROSECUTION VERSION

         If this case were to proceed to trial, the government would prove that from

  about November 2021 to about February 2022, in the District of Maine and

  elsewhere, the Defendant, Xavier Pelkey, conspired to provide material support

  to terrorists. The government would prove the following facts through witness

  testimony, electronic evidence, documentary evidence and tangible evidence.

         Starting in about November 2021, Pelkey conspired with two minors, one

  located in the Chicago, Illinois area and the other located in Canada, to conduct a

  mass shooting at a Shia mosque in the Chicago area. Pelkey and his co-

  conspirators were subscribers to a radical form of Sunni Islam and believed that

  Shia Muslims were tantamount to non-believers and therefore appropriate

  targets for violent attacks. Pelkey and his co-conspirators were also supporters of

  the foreign terrorist organization the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

         Pelkey and his co-conspirators planned for Pelkey and the Canadian co-

  conspirator to travel to the Chicago area to meet the Illinois co-conspirator and

  commit the attack against the Shia mosque. Pelkey and his co-conspirators

  planned to enter the mosque, separate the adult men from the women and

  children, and then kill all the adult men. If, at that point, law enforcement had

  not intervened, they planned to travel to another Shia mosque or possibly
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 2 of 7             PageID #: 192




  another house of worship and do the same thing. They planned to continue until

  they were shot and killed by law enforcement. The attack was to occur around

  March of 2022.

         In addition to providing his own personal participation in the attack on the

  mosque, Pelkey also planned to contribute firearms, ammunition and explosives

  that were to be used in the attack. Pelkey discussed the planned attack and his

  role in it with the Illinois co-conspirator via encrypted messaging applications.

  Pelkey was aware that there was another co-conspirator located in Canada.

         In Instagram chat conversations that occurred during the existence of the

  conspiracy, the Illinois co-conspirator and the Canadian co-conspirator chatted

  about the plan to attack the mosque. They also discussed Pelkey, referring to him

  as “Abdullah,” a shortened version of Pelkey’s Instagram username,

  “Abdullah.ibn.ahmad.” They noted that Pelkey was attempting to obtain firearms

  and that he had made an explosive device.

         On February 10, 2022, an FBI agent obtained search warrants for Pelkey’s

  person and for his residence in Waterville, Maine. Agents executed the warrants

  the following day. Pelkey was present when agents arrived and agreed to answer

  questions from investigators. He confirmed that he was the owner of the

  Instagram account with the username Abdullah.ibn.ahmad.

         Agents identified one of the rooms in the apartment as Pelkey’s bedroom.

  In a backpack found in the corner of the bedroom, they found three handmade

  explosive devices. Each device consisted of several fireworks items bundled

  together with tape. The following is a photograph of the devices:



                                           2
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 3 of 7              PageID #: 193




  The FBI’s Explosives Unit in Quantico, Virginia later concluded that the devices

  met the definition of a “destructive device” under federal law. In particular, the

  Explosives Unit concluded that the addition of the metal items to the bundled

  fireworks indicated that the devices were explosives specifically designed as

  weapons.

         When agents first spoke with Pelkey, he told them he had “fireworks” in

  the apartment. After agents found the three devices described above, an agent

  asked him why the fireworks were taped together, and he said he wanted to make

  a “bigger boom.” The agent then asked him why the metal items were in the

  devices, but he did not respond to the question.




                                           3
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 4 of 7                  PageID #: 194




  On the wall of Pelkey’s bedroom, investigators observed a hand-painted version

  of the flag used by ISIS. The following is a photograph of the flag, taken in the

  bedroom:




         Agents also found a handwritten document in Pelkey’s bedroom that

  appeared to be drafts of his public statement that would be released just prior to

  the Chicago attack, claiming the attack in the name of ISIS. In the statement, he

  pledged allegiance to ISIS and to Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi, the second

  “caliph,” or leader, of ISIS. He also stated that he intended to “burst thru the door

  of Jihad in america and strike fear in the hearts of these kafirun nothing pisses

  these american kuffar off and scares em more than a term they use ‘homegrown

  terrorist’ and I will claim this term let them cast me as a homegrown terrorist.” 1


  1“Kafirun” and “kuffar” are variations on the Arabic term for one who rejects or
  disbelieves in God as per Islam.

                                              4
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 5 of 7               PageID #: 195




  He also compared himself to other individuals who had planned or committed

  attacks on American soil, including Malik Faisal Akram, a British national who

  took four people hostage at a Texas synagogue on January 17, 2022, before being

  shot and killed by law enforcement agents.

            Pelkey’s handwritten document also included the following statement: 2

            Ya america all my next deeds and actions are at your faults
            everything you mushrikin have done time and time again to my
            brothers and sisters from rape and imprisonment all the away to
            tortoure and murder you kufirun have bomb and slaughtered whole
            familys generations of muslims gone in one sweep by your boms do
            you think you can get away with this wallahi you taghut homo
            loving racist pricks will be striked in your homes same as us you are
            not safe the way you make my brothers and sisters feel all the ones
            you have brutal murdered likewise the muslimin sill aliv in your
            filthy prisons we will make you feel in your homeland to you think
            im the only one with a plan your all foolish we will terrorize as you
            have terrorized we will kill your mature kaffir men as they have
            slain us wallahi you mushrikin have killed to many muslims to
            count and I stopped after I we seek retribution for are brothers and
            sisters while they are at peace in Jannah in the heart of a green
            birds and their home is lanterns hanging from Allah
            subhianawatallahs throne and I will see them there soon in sha
            Allah.

            A review of one of Pelkey’s electronic devices seized under the search

  warrant for his residence, a Motorola Android phone, showed that Google

  searches were conducted on February 6, just five days before the search warrant

  was executed at his residence, for “is a gun shop or a pawn shop easier to buy a

  gun.” Two days before, on February 4, searches were conducted regarding Allison

  Fluke-Ekren, a Kansas woman who was charged in early 2022 with providing

  material support to a foreign terrorist organization by organizing an all-female




  2   All misspellings and other errors were in the original document.

                                                5
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 6 of 7            PageID #: 196




  ISIS military battalion. Also on February 4, a Google search was conducted for

  “gun shop maine,” and the web site of a gun shop in Fairfield, Maine was browsed

  for semi-automatic rifles, shotguns and handguns.

        Pelkey knowingly and willfully entered into the conspiracy with the minors

  from Illinois and Canada. He and his co-conspirators intended to participate

  personally in the killing of persons at the Chicago mosque after Pelkey and the

  Canadian minor had traveled to Illinois, and Pelkey also intended to provide

  firearms, ammunition and explosives that were to be used in the attack. He

  intended to use the three destructive devices found in his bedroom in the attack.



  Dated: March 29, 2023                           Respectfully submitted,



                                                    /s/ Craig M. Wolff
                                                  Craig M. Wolff
                                                  Assistant United States Attorney
                                                  U.S. Attorney’s Office
                                                  100 Middle Street, 6th Floor
                                                  Portland, ME 04101
                                                  (207) 780-3257
                                                  craig.wolff@usdoj.gov




                                          6
Case 1:22-cr-00050-LEW Document 70 Filed 03/29/23 Page 7 of 7           PageID #: 197




                            CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

         I hereby certify that on March 29, 2023, I filed this Prosecution

  Version with the Clerk of Court using the CM/ECF system, which will send

  notification of such filing to the following:


                           Christopher K. MacLean, Esq.
                            chris@dirigolawgroup.com

                                                  DARCIE N. MCELWEE
                                                  UNITED STATES ATTORNEY



                                                   /s/ Craig M. Wolff
                                                  Craig M. Wolff
                                                  Assistant United States Attorney




                                             7
