 

IN THE UNITED STATES DIsTRICT CoURnu g l _ w , §
FoR THE DISTRICT oF PUERTo choZum r€.:`: 213 m 31 04

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Plamuff, CRIMINAL No. 17-507 (CCC)

V.
[7] JULISSA CARRASQUILLO-

BALDOMERO,
Defendant.

PLEA AGREEMENT
(Pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(B))

TO THE HONORABLE COURT:
COMES NOW, the United States of America, by and through its attorneys for the District

of Puerto Rico: Rosa Eniilia Rodriguez-Velez, United States Attorney, Timothy Henwood, First

ll Assistant United States Attorney, Jenjfer Y. HernandeZ-Vega, Assistant United States Attorney,

Unit Chief, Violent Crimes, and Victor O. Acevedo-Hernandez, Assistant United States Attorney,
along With Defendant, Julissa Carrasquillo-Baldomero, and her counsel, Jose R. Gaztambide-
Aneses, and, pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure ll(c)(l)(B), state to this Honorable
Court that they have reached a Plea Agreernent, the terms and conditions of Which are as follows:

1. CHARGES TO WHICH DEFENDANT PLEADS GUILTY

Defendant agrees to plead guilty to Count One, Which charges her With beginning on a date
unknown, but no later than in or about the year 2015, and continuing up to and until March 2017,
in the District of Puerto Rico and Within the jurisdiction of this Court, knowingly and Willfully
conspiring and agreeing With co-defendants and others to engage in the business of dealing

firearms Without a license, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(l)(A).

2. MAXIMUM PENALTIES

Defendant understands that the penalty for Count One is as follows: a maximum term of
imprisonment of 5 years; a fine of not more than $250,000.00; and a term of supervised release of
not more than three years.

3. SENTENCING GUIDELINES APPLICABILITY

Defendant understands that the sentence will be left entirely to the sound discretion of the

Court in accordance with 18 U.S.C. §§ 3551-86, and the United States Sentencing Guidelines
ereinafter “Guidelines”), which have been rendered advisory by the United States Supreme

Court decision in United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005). Further, Defendant acknowledges
that parole has been abolished and that the imposition of her sentence may not be suspended

4. SPECIAL MONETARY ASSESSMENT

Defendant agrees to pay a special monetary assessment of one hundred dollars (3100.00),
per count of conviction, to be deposited in the Crime Victim Fund, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §
3013(a)(2)(A).

l 5. FINES AND RESTITUTION

Defendant is aware that the Court may, pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 5El.2, order her to pay a
fine sufficient to reimburse the Government for the costs of any imprisonment, probation, or
supervised release ordered. The Court may also impose restitution The United States will make
no recommendations as to the imposition of fines and restitution

6. RULE 11(c)(1)(B) WARNINGS

Defendant is aware that her sentence is within the sound discretion of the sentencing judge

and of the advisory nature of the Guidelines, including the Guidelines Policv Statements,

Application, and Background Notes. Further, Defendant understands and acknowledges that the

Court is not a party to this Plea Agreement and thus, is not bound by this agreement or the

sentencing calculations and recommendations contained Defendant specifically acknowledges

that the Court has jurisdiction and authority to impose any sentence within the statutory maximum

set for the offense to which Defendant is pleading guilty. Defendant is aware that the Court may

accept or reject the Plea Agreement, or may defer its decision whether to accept or reject the Plea

Agreement until it has considered the pre-sentence investigation report. § Fed. R. Crim. P.

l(c)(3)(A). Should the Court impose a sentence up to the maximum established by statute,

Defendant cannot, for that reason alone, withdraw her guilty plea, and will remain bound to fulfill

all of the obligations under this Plea Agreement. § Fed. R. Crim. P. l l(c)(3)(B).

7. APPLICABILITY OF UNITED STATES SENTENCING GUIDELINES

Defendant is aware that pursuant to the decisions issued by the Supreme Court of the

United States in United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), the Guidelines are no longer

mandatory and must be considered effectively advisory. Therefore, after due consideration of the

relevant factors enumerated in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), the United States and Defendant submit the

following advisory Guideline calculation:

 

Sentencing Guidelines Calculation

 

 

 

 

 

 

Base Offense
Levei U.s.S.G. § 2K2.i(a)(7) 12
Specific Offense
Characteristics U.S.S.G. § 2K2.l(b)(5), Defendant engaged in the trafficking of firearms 4
Acceptance U.S.S.G. § 3El.l, Acceptance of responsibility -3
ToL | CHCI | CHCII l CHCIII | CHCIV l CHCV | CHCVI rural
. Offense
Sentencmg Level 13
Ranges 13 012-018 015-021 018-024 024-030 030-037 033-041 Count
One

 

 

 

 

 

 

8. NO STIPULATION AS TO CRIMINAL HISTORY CATEGORY

The parties do not stipulate as to any Criminal History Category for Defendant.

9. SENTENCE RECOMMENDATION

After due consideration of the relevant factors enumerated in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), as to
Count One, the parties will recommend a sentence of imprisonment within the guideline
sentencing range at a total offense level of l3 when combined with Defendant’s Criminal History
Category as determined by the Court.

10. WAIVER OF APPEAL

Defendant knowingly and voluntarily agrees that, if the imprisonment sentence imposed
by the Court is 30 months or less, the defendant waives the right to appeal any aspect of this case’s
judgment and sentence, including but not limited to the term of imprisonment or probation,
restitution, fines, forfeiture, and the term and conditions of supervised release.

11. NO FURTHER ADJUSTMENTS ()R DEPARTURES

The United States and Defendant agree that no further adjustments or departures to
Defendant’s total adjusted base offense level and no variance sentence under 18 U.S.C. § 3553
shall be sought by either party. The parties agree that any request by either party for an adjustment
or departure will be considered a material breach of this Plea Agreement, in which case, the Plea
Agreement will be annulled and Defendant’s rights as enumerated in paragraph thirteen (l3) will
be reinstated

12. SATISFACTION WITH COUNSEL

Defendant represents to the Court that she is satisfied with counsel, Jose R. Gaztambide-

Aneses, and asserts that counsel has rendered effective legal assistance

13.

RIGHTS SURRENDERED BY DEFENDANT THR()UGH GUILTY PLEA

Defendant understands that by entering into this Plea Agreement she surrenders certain

rights as provided in this agreement Defendant understands that the rights of criminal Defendants

include the following:

21.

14.

lf Defendant had persisted in a plea of not guilty to the charges, Defendant would
have had the right to a speedy jury trial with the assistance of counsel. The trial may
be conducted by a judge sitting without a jury if Defendant, the United States and
the judge agree.

lf a jury trial is conducted, the jury would be composed of twelve lay persons
selected at random. Defendant and Defendant’s attorney would assist in selecting
the jurors by removing prospective jurors for cause where actual bias or other
disqualification is shown, or by removing prospective jurors without cause by
exercising peremptory challenges The jury would have to agree, unanimously,
before it could return a verdict of either guilty or not guilty. The jury would be
instructed that Defendant is presumed innocent, that it could not convict Defendant
unless, after hearing all the evidence, it was persuaded of Defendant’s guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt, and that it was to consider each charge separately.

lf a trial is held by the judge without a jury, the judge would find the facts and, after
hearing all the evidence and considering each count separately, determine whether
or not the evidence established Defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

At a trial, the United States would be required to present its witnesses and other
evidence against Defendant. Defendant would be able to confront those witnesses
and Defendant’s attorney would be able to cross-examine them. ln turn, Defendant
could present witnesses and other evidence on Defendant’s own behalf. If the
witnesses for Defendant would not appear voluntarily, Defendant could require
their attendance through the subpoena power of the Court.

At a trial, Defendant could rely on the privilege against self-incrimination to decline
to testify, and no inference of guilt could be drawn from Defendant’s refusal to
testify. If Defendant desired to do so, Defendant could testify on Defendant’s own
behalf.

STIPULATION OF FACTS

The accompanying Stipulation of F acts signed by Defendant is hereby incorporated into

this Plea Agreement. Defendant adopts the Stipulation of Facts and agrees that the facts therein

are accurate in every respect and, had the matter proceeded to trial, that the United States would
have proven those facts beyond a reasonable doubt.

15. LIMITATIONS OF PLEA AGREEMENT

This Plea Agreement binds only the United States Attorney’s Office for the District of
Puerto Rico and Defendant. lt does not bind any other federal district, state, or local authorities.

16. ENTIRETY OF PLEA AGREEMENT

This written agreement constitutes the complete Plea Agreement between the United
States, Defendant, and Defendant’s counsel. The United States has made no promises or
representations except as set forth in writing in this Plea Agreement and denies the existence of
any other term and conditions not stated herein.

17. AMENDMENTS TO PLEA AGREEMENT

eye

No other promises, terms or conditions will be entered unless in writing and signed by all

parties.

[SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]

18. VOLUNTARINESS OF GUILTY PLEA
Defendant acknowledges that no threats have been made against her and that she is
pleading guilty freely and voluntarily because she is guilty.

RosA EMILIA RoDRiGUEZ-vELEZ

 

 

 

United States Attorney

Timothy Henwood Jose R. Gaztam de-Aneses
First Assistant U. S. Attorney Counsel forDe end /
Dated: 5-[5 iii Dated: ..SD€ Z f .Z/<“)/

Af\ m air mama

Je.li:ferY :/\"nandez- ega Juijissa Carrasquillobialdomero
S

Ass stant U Attorney Defendant

Chi f, Viol Crimes Dated: 51 2;[ ?,O/f
Dated: §§ 143 '2-0\`3

W

Victor O. Acevedo-Hernandez

Assistant U. .Attorney
Dated: S'M 53

 

UNDERSTANDING OF RIGHTS
I have consulted with my counsel and hilly understand all of my rights with respect to the
charges pending against me. Further, l have consulted with my attorney and fully understand my
rights with respect to the provisions of the Sentencing Guidelines, Policv Statements, Ar)plication,
and Backgi_round Notes which may apply in my case. l have read this Plea Agreement and carefully
reviewed every part of it with my attomey. My counsel has translated the Plea Agreement it to me
in the Spanish language and l have no doubts as to the contents of the agreement l fully understand

this agreement and voluntarily agree to it.

Date: 52 aff Z€)/QV/

 

 

Juli aCarrasquillo-Ba omero
ndant

 

l am the attorney for Defendant. l have hilly explained Defendant’s rights to Defendant
with respect to the pending charges. Further, l have reviewed the provisions of the Sentencing
Guidelines, Policy Statements, Application, and Background Notes, and l have fully explained to
Defendant the provisions of those guidelines which may apply in this case. l have carefully
reviewed every part of this Plea Agreement with Defendant I have translated the Plea Agreement
and explained it iri the Spanish language to the Defendant who has expressed having no doubts as
to the contents of the agreement To my knowledge, Defendant is entering into this Plea Agreement
voluntarily, intelligently, and with full knowledge of all consequences of Defendant’s plea of
guilty.

-5` / rt 'VM//
Date: ._‘J 2§ /f . V ~J

Jose R. Gazt(g$b£ae~zém@s

Counsel for Defendant

STIPULATION OF FACTS
In conjunction with the submission of the accompanying Plea Agreement in this case, the
United States of America submits the following statement setting forth the United States’ version
of the facts leading to Defendant’s acceptance of criminal responsibility Had this matter
proceeded to trial, the United States would have presented evidence through the testimony of
witnesses, law enforcement agents, and experts, as well as physical evidence and documentary
evidence, which would have proven the following beyond a reasonable doubt:

Begirming on a date unknown, but no later than in or about the year 2015, and continuing

/ up to and until March 2017, Defendant was part of a firearms trafficking organization The purpose

of this group was to purchase firearms in the States of Georgia and Florida, to transport the firearms
to Puerto Rico, and to sell those firearms to other individuals in Puerto Rico, for profit. The
Defendants had roles, which were necessary for the success of the enterprise Defendant’s role was
to fill out MoneyGrams to obtain the proceeds from the sale of the firearms

Defendant accepts not being a licensed dealer of firearms within the meaning of Chapter
44, Title 18, United States Code.

The United States timely provided discovery to Defendant.

z /wt;:/>!/%

 

 

Victor O. Acevedo-Hernandez Jose R. Gaztaré)zii`de-Aneses

Assistant Un`te States Attorney Counsel for Def dan
Dated; S’ \4 9 Dated; ;sz»/;/VL

J lissa Carrasqu lo-Baldomero

fendant .
Dat@d: M

   
     

