Judge Elliot,

My name is Jared Sergi and | am writing to you today regarding Kyle
Morris. Mr.Morris and | have been close friends dating back to elementary
school. My family had just moved in next to his and Mr. Morris was the first
person to welcome me to the new neighborhood and schoo! with open arms and
has been there for me anytime | have needed any help or guidance since then.
Over the years, | have built a close relationship with Mr. Morris and his family. Mr.
Morris has always been a very driven, family oriented man. Being two growing
boys, we have had numerous conversations about life goals and intentions over
the years. Mr. Morris was never a greedy man. He never wanted the nicest car or
the. biggest house. For as long as | can remember, he has had two main goals in
mind. One being to follow his fathers footsteps by joining the military, and to start
and raise a family of his own. Even before high school graduation, when other
students were partying or maybe applying to colleges, Mr. Morris was already
focused on his goals and had enlisted in the U.S Army just awaiting his diploma
before he could leave for basic training. | always admired his dedication and self
discipline especially at such a young age. Mr. Morris then went on to serve our
country for four years gladly and proudly. We did remain in contact while he
served, and while his time in the military was dangerous and he was separated
from everything familiar Mr. Morris did not complain. He was so proud of what he
was doing and happy to give his time to serve our country. Upon his return, Mr.
Morris then purchased his childhood home in hopes of being able to create a
family of his own in the same home he grew up in. Mr. Morris also met his
wonderful and supportive partner, Anna, who has been nothing but amazing for
him. From being there for him emotionally, to maintaining their home in his
absence to make sure he has a nice and healthy home environment to return to,
Anna has been the absolute perfect partner to Mr. Morris. Along with Anna, Mr.
Morris also has a very caring family and support system ready to assist with
anything he may need upon his return home to make his transition as smooth as
possible. We all want to see Mr. Morris get back into the workforce and back on
track towards his goals of raising a family of his own and furthering his life in the
most positive ways. We want to see Mr. Morris come home and become the best
father and husband he can be as we all know he will. | really appreciate you
taking the time out of what | am sure was a very busy day for you to read this and
hear what | have to say. Thank you for hearing me out Judge Elliot.

-Jared Sergi
 

Dear Honorable Judge Samantha Elliot,

My name is Derek Grella, | first met Kyle Morris in the year 2007. Throughout the past 15 years
or so, we have grown up and evolved together as close friends, almost brothers. Many of my
fondest childhood memories include Kyle, some of my worst too. As kids we were always
together. When his mother worked night shifts, he would stay at my house. While my mother
worked day shifts, | would be at his house. I've always known I could count on him, not just as a
friend, but also as a role model of sorts. Especially seeing how he stepped up as a man to be
there for his family when his father passed away. That never stopped him from achieving his
goals though. For as long as I can remember Kyle always wanted to serve in the military. When
he enrolled in the Army I was beyond proud, yet saddened knowing my best friend would be
putting himself in harm's way for our country. Even when facing some challenges after returning
home, Kyle has always exercised respect, loyalty, compassion, and kindness with his family,
friends, as well as his community. | am eager and fortunate to see the positive progression in
his life. Thank you for taking the time to read this letter.

Sincerely,

LD fy

ot 1 KL he
” Derek Grella
Hello Judge Samantha Elliot,

| am Anna Maria Holodowska, Kyle Morris’ girlfriend. We are in a committed relationship
and have been together for over two years. He’s the most caring, compassionate, and loving
boyfriend | could ever ask for.

Kyle is a very driven and goal oriented man. He graduated high school at 16 and joined
the army at 17. He was just 19 years old when serving in Afghanistan. After returning home, he
proudly bought his house at 20 and has plans of purchasing more rental properties in the near
future. He is working on getting his bachelor’s degree in history and will finish this degree when
he returns home.

Kyle is also a family oriented man. He enjoys visiting family members and spending the
day with them. During the summer he often invites over his family and mine for get-togethers on
his beach. Kyle and | plan to get married and start a family of our own. Since we started dating,
Kyle has become more invested in his faith. We pray often and attend church together.

Kyle understands how serious his charges are and he regrets his mistakes. It aches him
to see what he has put his family through watching him be away.

| am more than willing to support Kyle throughout the entirety of his sentencing, as well
as afterwards. Upon his release, Kyle has his own home to return to. Kyle has access to his
vehicle for job searching purposes. He may also use my car if needed. | will help him apply and
prepare for future job interviews.

I've missed Kyle greatly while he’s been away. It was incredibly hard adjusting to his
absence as we would spend the vast majority of our time together. It’s been difficult taking care

of the home by myself while also working and doing school.

Thank you for taking the time out of your day to read my letter.
