      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 1 of 8




                          IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO




  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                            Criminal No. 21-494 (DRD)
  Plaintiff,


                     v.


  MARCOS IVAN RODRIGUEZ-MELENDEZ,
  Defendant.



                           REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
                      ON RULE 11(c)(1)(B) CHANGE OF PLEA HEARING


        I.     Procedural Background
        On December 22, 2021, Defendant Marcos Iván Rodríguez Meléndez was charged by a Grand
Jury in a nine-count indictment. Defendant agrees to plead guilty to Counts One through Six and Nine
of the Indictment.
        Count One of the Indictment charges that, beginning on a date unknown to the Grand Jury, and
continuing to on or about December 9, 2021, in the District of Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction
of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez and co-defendants, knowingly and
intentionally combined, conspired, confederated, and agreed together and with each other, and with
other persons known and unknown to the Grand Jury, to commit the following offense against the
United States: possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance, namely, Lorazepam,
Triazolam, Pregabalin, Oxycodone, Phenobarbital, Estazolam, Carisoprodol, Clorazepate, Codeine,
Diazepam, Lacosamide, Tramadol, Alprazolam, and Marijuana, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 846,
841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(C), (D) & (E), and 841(b)(2) & (3).
        Count Two of the Indictment charges that on or about March 24, 2021, in the District of Puerto
Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez, and
co-defendants, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly and intentionally possess with intent to
      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 2 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


distribute a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of Oxycodone, a Scheduled II
controlled substance, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(C).
          Count Three of the Indictment charges that on or about March 24, 2021, in the District of
Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez,
and co-defendants, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly and intentionally possess with intent
to distribute a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of Codeine, a Schedule III
controlled substance, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(E)(i).
          Count Four of the Indictment charges that on or about March 24, 2021, in the District of Puerto
Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez, and
co-defendants, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly and intentionally possess with intent to
distribute a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of Lorazepam, Triazolam, Pregabalin,
Phenobarbital, Estazolam, Carisoprodol, Clorazepate, Diazepam, Lacosamide, Tramadol and
Alprazolam, a Schedule IV and V controlled substance, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(2),
(b)(3).
          Count Five of the Indictment charges that on or about October 13, 2021, in the District of
Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez,
and co-defendants, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly and intentionally possess with intent
to distribute a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of marijuana, a Schedule I
controlled substance, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(D).
          Count Six of the Indictment charges that on or about May 6, 2021, in the District of Puerto
Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez, and
co-defendants, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly and intentionally possess with intent to
distribute a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of marijuana, a Schedule I controlled
substance, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(D).
          Count Nine of the Indictment charges that on or about December 8, 2021, in the District of
Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez,
knowingly possessed, concealed, and stored a stolen firearm, that is, one Glock Model 27, .40 caliber,
bearing serial number BCEM556, which had been shipped and transported in interstate and foreign
commerce, knowing and having reasonable cause to believe the firearm was stolen, in violation of 18
U.S.C. §§ 922(j) and 924(a)(2).




                                                    2
         Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 3 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


          On March 7, 2023, Defendant informed the Court of his intention to change his plea. Docket
No. 97. The United States of America and Defendant entered into a Plea and Forfeiture Agreement.
Docket No.124. Pursuant to the plea agreement, Defendant agreed to plead guilty to Counts One
through Six and Nine of the Indictment. On May 8, 2023, Defendant appeared before this Court for a
change of plea hearing pursuant to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. See United
States v. Woodward, 387 F. 3d. 1329 (11th Cir. 2004) (holding that a magistrate judge may, with the
defendant’s consent, conduct a Rule 11 change of plea hearing). Defendant was advised of the purpose
of the hearing and placed under oath with instructions that his answers must be truthful because
otherwise he could be charged with perjury.
          II.    Consent to Proceed Before a Magistrate Judge
          Defendant was advised of his right to hold all proceedings, including this change of plea
hearing, before a district court judge. An explanation of the differences between the scope of
jurisdiction and functions of a district judge and a magistrate judge was provided. Defendant was
informed that, if he elects to proceed before a magistrate judge, the magistrate judge would conduct
the hearing and prepare a report and recommendation, subject to the review and approval of the district
judge.
          Defendant was provided with a Waiver of Right to Trial by Jury, which he signed prior to the
hearing. Docket No.123. Defendant validated his signature and informed that his attorney had
translated the document to Spanish and had explained the document before signing the same. The Court
found that Defendant voluntarily consented to proceed before a magistrate judge and approved
Defendant’s consent.
          III.   Proceedings Under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure
          Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure governs the acceptance of guilty pleas to
federal criminal violations. Pursuant to Rule 11, for a plea of guilty to constitute a valid waiver of the
defendant’s right to trial, the guilty plea must be knowing and voluntary. United States v. Hernández
Wilson, 186 F. 3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1999). “Rule 11 was intended to ensure that a defendant who pleads
guilty does so with an ‘understanding of the nature of the charge and consequences of his plea’”. United
States v. Cotal-Crespo, 47 F. 3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting McCarthy v. United States, 394 U. S. 459,
467 (1969)). There are three core concerns in a Rule 11 proceeding: 1) absence of coercion; 2)
understanding of the charges; and 3) knowledge of the consequences of the guilty plea.




                                                    3
      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 4 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


        A. Competence to Enter a Guilty Plea
        The Court questioned Defendant about his age, education, history of any treatment for mental
illness or addiction, use of any medication, drugs or alcohol, and his understanding of the purpose of
the hearing, to ascertain his capacity to understand, answer and comprehend the change of plea
colloquy. The Court confirmed that Defendant received the Indictment and fully discussed the charges
with his attorney, and that he was satisfied with the advice and representation he received. The Court
further inquired whether Defendant’s counsel or counsel for the Government had any reservations as
to Defendant’s competency to plead, receiving answers that Defendant was competent to enter a plea.
After considering Defendant’s responses, and observing his demeanor, the Court found that Defendant
was competent to plead and fully aware of the purpose of the hearing.
        B. Plea Agreement
        Defendant was shown his plea agreement, including the stipulation of facts, and he identified
his initials and signatures. Defendant confirmed that he had the opportunity to read and discuss the
plea agreement and plea agreement supplement with his attorney, that his attorney translated both the
plea agreement and the plea agreement supplement before he signed the documents, that the plea
agreement represented the entirety of his understanding with the Government, that he understood the
terms of the plea agreement and plea agreement supplement, and that no one had made any other or
different promises or assurances to induce him to plead guilty. Counsel for the Government described
the essential terms of the plea agreement, including stipulations pertaining to the Sentencing Guidelines
and any sentencing recommendations. Counsel for the defense agreed with the Government’s
description of the terms and recommendations, and so did Defendant.
        Defendant was then admonished, pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(B),
that the terms of the plea agreement are mere recommendations to the Court, and that the District Judge
who will preside over the sentencing hearing can reject the recommendations without permitting him
to withdraw his guilty plea. And that the District Judge could impose a sentence that is more severe
than what Defendant might anticipate. Defendant expressed full understanding of the foregoing and
confirmed that he was aware that, if the District Judge does not follow the recommendations in the
plea agreement, he will not be allowed to withdraw his plea of guilty if he receives a sentence that is
higher than expected.




                                                   4
      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 5 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


        C. Voluntariness
        In considering the plea agreement, Defendant acknowledged that the plea agreement contains
all the promises and agreements that he made with the Government and that no one made any other or
different promise or assurance of any kind in exchange for his guilty plea, other than the
recommendations set forth in the plea agreement. Defendant indicated that he was not being induced
to plead guilty, that he was entering such plea freely and voluntarily because in fact he is guilty, and
that no one has threatened him or offered a thing of value in exchange for his plea. Defendant
understood that the offenses to which he is pleading guilty are felonies and that, if the plea is accepted,
he will be adjudged guilty of those offenses, and that such adjudication may deprive him of valuable
civil rights, such as the right to vote, the right to hold public office, the right to serve on a jury, and the
right to possess a firearm.
        Throughout the hearing, Defendant was free to consult with his attorney or to seek clarification
from the Court. He confirmed that his agreement to plead guilty was made knowingly and voluntarily.
        D. Maximum Penalties
        Defendant expressed his understanding of the statutory maximum penalties for the offenses to
which he was pleading guilty. The maximum statutory penalties for Counts One and Two of the
Indictment are a term of imprisonment of not more than twenty (20) year, a fine not to exceed one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and a term of supervised release of not less than three (3) years. Count
Three of the Indictment carries a term of imprisonment of not more than ten (10) years, a fine not to
exceed five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), and a term of supervised release of at least two
(2) years. Count Four of the Indictment carries a term of imprisonment of not more than five (5) years,
a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), and a supervised release term
of at least one (1) year. Counts Five and Six of the Indictment carries a term of imprisonment of not
more than five (5) years, a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), and
supervised release term of not less than two (2) years. Count Nine of the Indictment carries a term of
imprisonment of not more than ten (10) years, a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00), and a supervised release term of not more than three (3) years. In addition, a
Special Monetary Assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per count of conviction would be
imposed to be deposited to the Criminal Victims Fund pursuant to Title 18, United States Code, Section
3013(a). Defendant indicated that he understood the maximum penalties, that the offenses charged are




                                                      5
          Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 6 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


felonies, and the potential consequences of the guilty plea, such as the deprivation of certain valuable
rights.
           The Court then explained the nature of supervised release and the consequences of violating
conditions of supervised release. Specifically, Defendant was informed that, if supervised release is
revoked, he may be required to serve an additional term of imprisonment up to the full term of
supervised release originally imposed by the Court. And that, if he is currently on supervised release
in a different case than the one object of the Indictment here, his plea of guilty, if accepted, could result
in negative consequences, such as the revocation of his supervised release in that other case. The Court
further advised Defendant that in certain cases the Court may also order, or be required to order, that
he pay restitution to any victim of the offenses, and the Court may also require him to forfeit certain
property to the Government. Defendant was also informed that any sentence imposed in this case could
be imposed to run concurrently or consecutively to any sentence he may be currently serving in another
case.
           E. Sentencing Procedure
           Defendant was informed that, in determining his sentence, the District Judge is required to
consider, but not necessarily follow, the Sentencing Guidelines. Defendant confirmed that he discussed
with his attorney how the Sentencing Guidelines might apply to this case. Defendant was specifically
informed that the Court, after considering the applicable Sentencing Guidelines, could impose a
sentence different from any estimate in the plea agreement or provided by his attorney, and that the
Court had the authority to impose a sentence that is more severe or less severe than the sentence called
for by the Sentencing Guidelines. Defendant was advised, and informed to have understood, that the
Sentencing Guidelines are thus considered advisory, and that during sentencing the District Court will
consider the sentencing criteria found at Title 18, United States Code, Section 3553(a), which include
the seriousness of the offenses, the need for deterrence of criminal conduct, the need to protect the
public from further crimes, the need to provide Defendant with educational or vocational training, or
medical care, and the need to provide restitution to any victims.
           Defendant was advised that parole has been abolished and that, if he is sentenced to prison, he
will not be released on parole. Further, Defendant was advised of his right to appeal and that, under
some circumstances, he or the Government may have the right to appeal the sentence imposed by the
Court. But that, pursuant to his plea agreement, he is waiving his right to appeal both the judgment and
sentence imposed by the Court, if the Court accepts his plea agreement and sentences him within or


                                                     6
      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 7 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


below the Guidelines range for the total offense level calculated in the plea agreement when combined
with Defendant’s criminal history category as determined by the Court. Defendant informed that he
understood his right to appeal and that he voluntarily agreed to this waiver.
        F. Waiver of Constitutional Rights
        Defendant was specifically advised that he has the right to persist in a plea of not guilty and
that, if he does, he has the right to a speedy trial by jury, or trial before a judge sitting without a jury if
the Court and the Government so agree; that at trial he would be presumed innocent and the
Government would have to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; that he would have the right to
the assistance of counsel for his defense, and that, if he could not afford one, an attorney would be
appointed to represent him through all stages of the proceedings; that at trial he would have the right
to hear and cross examine all witnesses, the right to issue subpoenas or to compel the attendance of
witnesses to testify at trial, and the right to testify or to remain silent. Defendant was further advised
that if he decided not to testify or put on evidence at trial, the failure to do so could not be used against
him, and that at trial the jury would have to return a unanimous verdict before he could be found guilty
or not guilty.
        Defendant specifically acknowledged understanding these rights. He reaffirmed his
understanding that by entering a plea of guilty there would be no trial and he would be waiving or
giving up the rights that the Court explained.
        G. Offenses Charged and Factual Basis for the Guilty Plea
        Defendant was read in open court Counts One through Six and Nine of the Indictment and was
provided an explanation of technical terms used in the Indictment to describe the charges. Defendant
was also provided an explanation of the elements of the offenses. Defendant expressed that he
understood the charges in Counts One through Six and Nine and the elements of the offenses, and what
the Government would have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt if he were to go to trial.
        The Government explained the factual basis for the offenses and the evidence it would present
if this case were to proceed to trial. Upon questioning, Defendant admitted to the facts, constituting all
the elements of the offenses charged. Defendant admitted that he was pleading guilty because he is in
fact guilty. Defendant pled guilty as to Counts One through Six and Nine of the Indictment.




                                                      7
      Case 3:21-cr-00494-DRD-GLS Document 127 Filed 05/09/23 Page 8 of 8
USA v. Rodríguez-Meléndez
Cr. No. 21-494 (DRD)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


        IV.     Conclusion
        Defendant appeared before me, by consent, pursuant to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedures and entered a plea of guilty as to Counts One through Six and Nine of the
Indictment.
        After cautioning and examining Defendant under oath and in open court concerning each of
the subject matters in Rule 11, the Court finds that the defendant, Marcos Iván Rodríguez-Meléndez,
is fully competent and capable of entering this guilty plea, is aware of the nature of the charges and the
maximum statutory penalties these carry, understands that the charges are supported by evidence and
a basis in fact, has admitted to the facts and the elements of the offenses, and has done so in an
intelligent and voluntary manner with knowledge of the consequences of his guilty plea.
        I recommend that the Court accept the guilty plea and that Defendant be adjudged guilty as to
Counts One through Six and Nine of the Indictment.
        IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
        This Report and Recommendation is issued pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) and Rule 72
(d) of the Local Rules of this Court. Any objections to the same must be specific and must be filed
within fourteen (14) days of its receipt. Failure to file timely and specific objections to the Report and
Recommendation is a waiver of the right to review by the District Judge. United States v. Valencia-
Copete, 792 F. 2d 4 (1st Cir. 1986).
        A sentencing hearing will be scheduled by the presiding judge, Hon. Daniel R.
Domínguez.
        In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 9th day of May 2023.


                                                         s/Giselle López-Soler
                                                         GISELLE LÓPEZ-SOLER
                                                         United States Magistrate Judge




                                                    8
