AO 245B (Rev. MAS citi ¢ f0013/,DBH Docungay

Sheet |

 

 

U.S. DISTRICT
PORTLAND, ane

United States District Court? £c£vé0 ano Fite
District of Maine HZ JAN 23 Py: 30

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA JUDGMENT IN A CRIMINAL CASE

TIMOTHY O'BRIEN Case Number: 2:11-cr-137-001 2
USM Number: |

David R. Beneman, Esq. BR
Defendant's Attorney

 

 

THE DEFENDANT:

pleaded guilty to Count One of the Indictment.

[_] pleaded nolo contendere to count(s) which was accepted by the court.
L_] was found guilty on count(s) after a plea of not guilty.

 

 

The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these offenses:

Title & Section Nature of Offense Offense Ended Count 4
Possession ofa Firearm by 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(9) and March 16, 2011 One

a Person Previously 924(a)(2)

Convicted of a

Misdemeanor Crime of
Domestic Violence

The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 6 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

[-] The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s)
[-] Count(s) F] is [] are dismissed on the motion of the United States.

It is ordered that the defendant must notify the United States attorney for this district within 30 days of any change of name,
residence, or mailing address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. If
ordered to pay restitution, the defendant shall notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in economic
circumstances.

 

Iffuar23, 2072 >

ate of CS

Signature of Judge

D. Brock Hornby, U.S. District Judge
Name and Title of,Judge

ssgfiz

Date Signed

 

 

 
Case 2:11-cr-00137-DBH Document 26 Filed 01/23/12 Page2of6 PagelD #: 32
AO 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgment in a Criminal Case

Sheet 2 — Imprisonment

DEFENDANT: TIMOTHY O'BRIEN
CASE NUMBER: — 2:11-cr-137-001 5

IMPRISONMENT

Judgment-—Page 2 of 6

The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned fora .
total term of Time Served.

[1 The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:

>] The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.

[] The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district:

 

 

 

 

 

O at Oam. O p.m. on .
Oo as notified by the United States Marshal.
[1 The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons.
Oo before 2 p.m. on . .
Oo as notified by the United States Marshal.
Oo as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.
RETURN
I have executed this judgment as follows:
Defendant delivered on to
at , with a certified copy of this judgment.

 

 

UNITED STATES MARSHAL

 

DEPUTY UNITED STATES MARSHAL

 
Case 2:11-cr-00137-DBH Document 26 Filed 01/23/12 Page3of6 PagelD #: 33
AQ 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3 — Supervised Release

 

Judgment—Page 3 of 6
DEFENDANT: TIMOTHY O'BRIEN
CASE NUMBER: 2:11-cr-137-001
SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of 2 Years.

The Defendant must report to the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release from _
the custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state, or local crime.

The defendant shal! not unlawfully possess a controlled substance. The defendant shail refrain from any unlawful use of a
controlled substance. The defendant shall submit to one drug test within 15 days of release from imprisonment and at least two
additional drug tests during the term of supervision, but not more than 120 drug tests per year thereafter, as directed by the
probation officer. :

[_] The above drug testing condition is suspended, based on the court's determination that the defendant poses a low risk of future: -
substance abuse. (Check, if applicable.) :

[X] The defendant shall not possess a firearm, ammunition, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon. (Check, if
applicable.)
[|The defendant shall cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

[|The defendant shall comply with the requirements of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (42 U.S.C. § 16901,

 

 

 

 

 

et seq.) as directed by the probation officer, the Bureau of Prisons, or any state sex offender registration agency in which he or”

she resides, works, is a student, or was convicted of a qualifying offense (Check, if applicable.)

[|The defendant shall participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (Check, if applicable.)

If this judgment imposes a fine or restitution, it is a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay in accordance with the.
Schedule of Payments of this judgment. "

The defendant must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by this court as well as any additional conditions
on the attached page.

STANDARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION
1) the defendant shall not leave the judictal district without the permission of the court or probation officer;
2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer in a manner and frequency directed by the court or probation officer;
3) the defendant shali answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the instructions of the probation officer;
4} the defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities; a
5} the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation, unless excused by the probation officer for schooling, training, or other acceptable reasons; -- /
6} the defendant shail notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employment;

7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shali not purchase, possess, use, distribute or administer any controlled substance or any
paraphernalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician. This provision does not permit the use of marijuana even with a’.
prescription, without further permission of the Court or probation officer.

8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed, or administered;

9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activity, and shall not associate with any person convicted of a felony, unless
granted permission to do so by the probation officer;

10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shal! permit confiscation of any contraband
observed in plain view of the probation officer:

11) the defendant shail notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer;

12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency without the permission of the
court; and

13) as directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notify third parties of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant's criminal record or
personal history or characteristics and shall permit the probation officer to make such notifications and to confirm the defendant's compliance with such |
notification requirement.

 

 
Case 2:11-cr-00137-DBH Document 26 Filed 01/23/12 Page4of6 PagelD#: 34

AO 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3C — Supervised Release

DEFENDANT: TIMOTHY O'BRIEN
CASE NUMBER: 2:11-cr-137-001

SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

Judgment—Page 4 of 6

1. Defendant shall participate in mental health treatment, as directed by the supervising officer, until released from the

program by the supervising officer. Defendant shall pay/co-pay for services during such treatment, to the supervising

officer’s satisfaction.

2. Defendant shall not use or possess any controlled substance, alcohol or other intoxicant; and shall participate in a
program of drug and aicohol abuse therapy to the supervising officer’s satisfaction. This shail include testing to
determine if Defendant has used drugs or intoxicants. Defendant shail submit to one test within 15 days of release
from prison and at least two, but not more than 120, tests per calendar year thereafter, as directed by the supervising.
officer. Defendant shall pay/co-pay for services during such treatment to the supervising officer’s satisfaction.
Defendant shall not obstruct or tamper, or try to obstruct or tamper, in any way, with any tests.

3. Defendant shall at all times readily submit to a search of his residence, and of any other premises under his

dominion and control, by his supervising officer, upon the officer’s request when the officer has reasonable basisto
believe that such a search will lead to the discovery of evidence of violation of the terms of supervised release. Failure
to submit to such a search may be grounds for revocation. ,

 
Case 2:11-cr-00137-DBH Document 26 Filed 01/23/12 Page5of6 PagelD #: 35

AQ 245B (Rev. 09-08) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 5 — Criminal Monetary Penalties

DEFENDANT: TIMOTHY O'BRIEN .
CASE NUMBER: 2:11-cr-137-001

Judgment—Page 5 of 6

CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under the schedule of payments on Sheet 6.

Count Assessment Fine Restitution
One $100.00
[_] The determination of restitution is deferred until . An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case (AO 245C) will be entered after such

determination.
[_] The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed below.

If the defendant makes a partial payment, each payee shall receive an approximately proportioned payment, unless specified otherwise in the .

priority order or percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(i), all nonfederal victims must be paid before the oe

United States is paid.
Name of Payee Total Loss* Restitution Ordered Priority or Percentage
TOTALS $ $

 

[1 Restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement §

[| The defendant must pay interest on restitution and a fine of more than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
fifteenth day after the date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(f). All of the payment options on Sheet 6 may be subject

to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

[-] The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay interest and it is ordered that:
[_] the interest requirement is waived for the {] fine [1 restitution.

(1 the interest requirement forthe [1 fine [-] restitution is modified as follows:

*Findings for the total amount of losses are required under Chapters 109A, 110, 110A, and | 13A of Title 18 United State Code, for offenses . -
committed on or after September 13, 1994, but before April 23, 1996

 
Case 2:11-cr-00137-DBH Document 26 Filed 01/23/12 Page6of6 PagelD #: 36
AO 245B (Rev. 09-08} Judgment in a Criminal Case

Sheet 6 — Schedule of Payments

DEFENDANT: TIMOTHY O'BRIEN
CASE NUMBER: 2:11-cr-137-001 >

Judgment—-Pape of 6

SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

. Having assessed the defendant’s ability to pay, payment of the total criminal monetary penalties are due as follows:

Lump sum payment of $100.00 due immediately, balance due
Any amount that the defendant is unable to pay now is due and payable during the term of incarceration. Upon release from

Ex]

A

Ex]

officer. Said payments are to be made during the period of supervised release, subject always to review by the sentencing judge on
request, by either the defendant or the government. a

(J not later than , OF
_] in accordance with [| C, LI D, or | CI E, or [_] F below; or

[] Payment to begin immediately (may be combined wih J] c, OJ D,or [1 F below); or

Cc (1 Payment in equal (e.z., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g, months or years), to commence - (e.¢, 30 or 60 days) after the date of this judgment; or

D [J Payment in equal (e.g, weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.2., months or years), ta commence fe.g., 30 or 60 days) afier release from imprisonment toa
term of supervision; or

E [] Payment during the term of supervised release will commence within (e.2., 30 or 60 days) after release from
imprisonment. The court will set the payment plan based on an assessment of the defendant’s ability to pay at that time; or

F  L[] Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penalties:

 

incarceration, any remaining balance shall be paid in monthly installments, to be initially determined in amount by the supervising oe

 

Unless the court has expressly ordered otherwise, if this judgment imposes imprisonment, payment of criminal monetary penalties is due during. :

imprisonment. All criminal monetary penalties, except those payments made through the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Inmate Financia

Responsibility Program, are made to the clerk of the court.

The defendant shail receive credit for all payments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.

F] Joint and Several

Defendant and Co-Defendant Names and Case Numbers (including defendant number), Total Amount, Joint and Several Amount, and
corresponding payee, if appropriate:

[] The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution.
[-] The defendant shall pay the following court cost(s):
C

The defendant shali forfeit the defendant’s interest in the following preperty to the United States:

Payments shall be applied in the following order: (1) assessment, (2) restitution principal, (3) restitution interest, (4) fine principal, (5) fine
interest, (6) community restitution, (7) penalties, and (8) costs, including cost of prosecution and court costs.

 
