       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 1 of 8




                       IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                         FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO


  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
  Plaintiff,                                          Criminal No. 21-280 (ADC)


                  v.


  ARGENIS OSCAR BONES-COLÓN,
  Defendant.




                        REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
                   ON RULE 11(c)(1)(B) CHANGE OF PLEA HEARING


        I.     Procedural Background
        On April 12, 2022, Defendant Argenis Oscar Bones-Colón was charged by a Grand Jury
in a four-count superseding indictment. Defendant agrees to plead guilty to Counts One and Two
of the Superseding Indictment.
        Count One of the Superseding Indictment charges that, on or about July 27, 2021, in the
District of Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Argenis Oscar
Bones Colón, and co-defendant, aiding and abetting each other, with the intent to cause death and
serious bodily harm, did tale a motor vehicle, to wit: a blue 2012 Jeep Grand Cherokee, license
plate ICZ578, which had been transported, shipped, and received in interstate and foreign
commerce from the person and in the presence of an adult female, by force, violence, and
intimidation. All in violation of Title 18 United States Code, Sections 2 and 2119(1).
        Count Two of the Superseding Indictment charges that, on or about July 27, 2021, in the
District of Puerto Rico and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the defendant, Argenis Oscar
Bones Colón, and co-defendant, aiding and abetting each other, did knowingly possess and
brandish a firearm in furtherance of a crime of violence that may be prosecuted in a Court of the
United States, namely, a carjacking as charged in Count One of the Superseding Indictment. All
in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Sections 924(c)(1)(A)(ii) and 2.
       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 2 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


        On May 10, 2023, Defendant informed the Court of his intention to change his plea. Docket
No. 82. The United States of America and Defendant entered into a Plea and Forfeiture Agreement.
Docket No. 87. Pursuant to the plea agreement, Defendant agreed to plead guilty to Counts One
and Two of the Superseding Indictment. As to Count Two, however, Defendant is pleading guilty
to a charge under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(i), which is a lesser-included offense of the offense
charged in Count Two; possession of a firearm during and in relation to a crime of violence. On
May 26, 2023, Defendant appeared before this Court for a change of plea hearing pursuant to Rule
11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. See United States v. Woodward, 387 F. 3d. 1329
(11th Cir. 2004) (holding that a magistrate judge may, with the defendant’s consent, conduct a Rule
11 change of plea hearing). Defendant was advised of the purpose of the hearing and placed under
oath with instructions that his answers must be truthful because otherwise he could be charged
with perjury.
        II.       Consent to Proceed Before a Magistrate Judge
        Defendant was advised of his right to hold all proceedings, including this change of plea
hearing, before a district court judge. An explanation of the differences between the scope of
jurisdiction and functions of a district judge and a magistrate judge was provided. Defendant was
informed that, if he elects to proceed before a magistrate judge, the magistrate judge would conduct
the hearing and prepare a report and recommendation, subject to the review and approval of the
district judge.
        Defendant was provided with a Waiver of Right to Trial by Jury, which he signed prior to
the hearing. Docket No. 86. Defendant validated his signature and informed that his attorney had
translated the document to Spanish and had explained the document before signing the same. The
Court found that Defendant voluntarily consented to proceed before a magistrate judge and
approved Defendant’s consent.
        III.      Proceedings Under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure
        Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure governs the acceptance of guilty pleas
to federal criminal violations. Pursuant to Rule 11, for a plea of guilty to constitute a valid waiver
of the defendant’s right to trial, the guilty plea must be knowing and voluntary. United States v.
Hernández Wilson, 186 F. 3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1999). “Rule 11 was intended to ensure that a defendant
who pleads guilty does so with an ‘understanding of the nature of the charge and consequences of

                                                  2
       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 3 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


his plea’”. United States v. Cotal-Crespo, 47 F. 3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting McCarthy v. United
States, 394 U. S. 459, 467 (1969)). There are three core concerns in a Rule 11 proceeding: 1)
absence of coercion; 2) understanding of the charges; and 3) knowledge of the consequences of
the guilty plea.
        A. Competence to Enter a Guilty Plea
        The Court questioned Defendant about his age, education, history of any treatment for
mental illness or addiction, use of any medication, drugs or alcohol, and his understanding of the
purpose of the hearing, to ascertain his capacity to understand, answer and comprehend the change
of plea colloquy. The Court confirmed that Defendant received the Superseding Indictment and
fully discussed the charges with his attorney, and that he was satisfied with the advice and
representation he received. The Court further inquired whether Defendant’s counsel or counsel for
the Government had any reservations as to Defendant’s competency to plead, receiving answers
that Defendant was competent to enter a plea. After considering Defendant’s responses, and
observing his demeanor, the Court found that Defendant was competent to plead and fully aware
of the purpose of the hearing.
        B. Plea Agreement
        Defendant was shown his plea agreement, including the stipulation of facts, and he
identified his initials and signatures. Defendant confirmed that he had the opportunity to read and
discuss the plea agreement and plea agreement supplement with his attorney, that his attorney
translated both the plea agreement and the plea agreement supplement before he signed the
documents, that the plea agreement represented the entirety of his understanding with the
Government, that he understood the terms of the plea agreement and plea agreement supplement,
and that no one had made any other or different promises or assurances to induce him to plead
guilty. Counsel for the Government described the essential terms of the plea agreement, including
stipulations pertaining to the Sentencing Guidelines and any sentencing recommendations.
Counsel for the defense agreed with the Government’s description of the terms and
recommendations, and so did Defendant.
        Defendant was then admonished, pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
11(c)(1)(B), that the terms of the plea agreement are mere recommendations to the Court, and that
the District Judge who will preside over the sentencing hearing can reject the recommendations

                                                 3
       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 4 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


without permitting him to withdraw his guilty plea. And that the District Judge could impose a
sentence that is more severe than what Defendant might anticipate. Defendant expressed
understanding of the foregoing and confirmed that he was fully aware that, if the District Judge
does not follow the recommendations in the plea agreement, he will not be allowed to withdraw
his plea of guilty if he receives a sentence that is higher than expected.
       C. Voluntariness
       In considering the plea agreement, Defendant acknowledged that the plea agreement
contains all the promises and agreements that he made with the Government and that no one made
any other or different promise or assurance of any kind in exchange for his guilty plea, other than
the recommendations set forth in the plea agreement. Defendant indicated that he was not being
induced to plead guilty, that he was entering such plea freely and voluntarily because in fact he is
guilty, and that no one has threatened him or offered a thing of value in exchange for his plea.
Defendant understood that the offenses to which he is pleading guilty are felonies and that, if the
plea is accepted, he will be adjudged guilty of those offenses, and that such adjudication may
deprive him of valuable civil rights, such as the right to vote, the right to hold public office, the
right to serve on a jury, and the right to possess a firearm.
       Throughout the hearing, Defendant was free to consult with his attorney or to seek
clarification from the Court. He confirmed that his agreement to plead guilty was made knowingly
and voluntarily.
       D. Maximum Penalties
       Defendant expressed his understanding of the statutory maximum penalties for the offenses
to which he was pleading guilty. The maximum statutory penalties for Count One of the
Superseding Indictment are a term of imprisonment of fifteen (15) years, a fine not to exceed two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), and a term of supervised release of not more than
three (3) years. Count Two of the Superseding Indictment carries a term of imprisonment of not
less than seven (7) years and up to life, consecutive any other term of imprisonment, a fine not to
exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), a term of supervised release of not more
than five (5) years. However, because the Defendant has agreed to plead to a lesser included
offense in Count Two (the possession of a firearm in furtherance of a crime of violence), the
applicable penalties are a term of imprisonment of no less than five (5) years and up to life,

                                                  4
       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 5 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


consecutive to any other term of imprisonment, a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00), and a term of supervised release of no more than five (5) years. In addition,
a Special Monetary Assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per count of conviction would
be imposed, to be deposited to the Criminal Victims Fund pursuant to Title 18, United States Code,
Section 3013(a). Defendant indicated that he understood the maximum penalties, that the offenses
charged are felonies, and the potential consequences of the guilty plea, such as the deprivation of
certain valuable rights.
       The Court then explained the nature of supervised release and the consequences of
violating conditions of supervised release. Specifically, Defendant was informed that, if supervised
release is revoked, he may be required to serve an additional term of imprisonment up to the full
term of supervised release originally imposed by the Court. And that, if he is currently on
supervised release in a different case than the one object of the Superseding Indictment here, his
plea of guilty, if accepted, could result in negative consequences, such as the revocation of his
supervised release in that other case. The Court further advised Defendant that in certain cases the
Court may also order, or be required to order, that he pay restitution to any victim of the offenses,
and the Court may also require him to forfeit certain property to the Government, as agreed in the
forfeiture provision of the plea agreement. Defendant was also informed that any sentence imposed
in this case could be imposed to run concurrently or consecutively to any sentence he may be
currently serving in another case.
       E. Sentencing Procedure
       Defendant was informed that, in determining his sentence, the District Judge is required to
consider, but not necessarily follow, the Sentencing Guidelines. Defendant confirmed that he
discussed with his attorney how the Sentencing Guidelines might apply to this case. Defendant
was specifically informed that the Court, after considering the applicable Sentencing Guidelines,
could impose a sentence different from any estimate in the plea agreement or provided by his
attorney, and that the Court had the authority to impose a sentence that is more severe or less severe
than the sentence called for by the Sentencing Guidelines. Defendant was advised, and informed
to have understood, that the Sentencing Guidelines are thus considered advisory, and that during
sentencing the District Court will consider the sentencing criteria found at Title 18, United States
Code, Section 3553(a), which include the seriousness of the offenses, the need for deterrence of

                                                  5
       Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 6 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


criminal conduct, the need to protect the public from further crimes, the need to provide Defendant
with educational or vocational training, or medical care, and the need to provide restitution to any
victims.
          Defendant was advised that parole has been abolished and that, if he is sentenced to prison,
he will not be released on parole. Further, Defendant was advised of his right to appeal and that,
under some circumstances, he or the Government may have the right to appeal the sentence
imposed by the Court. But that, pursuant to his plea agreement, he is waiving his right to appeal
both the judgment and sentence imposed by the Court, if the Court accepts his plea agreement and
sentences him within or below the Guidelines range for the total offense level calculated in the
plea agreement when combined with his criminal history category as determined by the Court.
Defendant informed that he understood his right to appeal and that he voluntarily agreed to this
waiver.
          F. Waiver of Constitutional Rights
          Defendant was specifically advised that he has the right to persist in a plea of not guilty
and that, if he does, he has the right to a speedy trial by jury, or trial before a judge sitting without
a jury if the Court and the Government so agree; that at trial he would be presumed innocent and
the Government would have to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; that he would have the
right to the assistance of counsel for his defense, and that, if he could not afford one, an attorney
would be appointed to represent him through all stages of the proceedings; that at trial he would
have the right to hear and cross examine all witnesses, the right to issue subpoenas or to compel
the attendance of witnesses to testify at trial, and the right to testify or to remain silent. Defendant
was further advised that if he decided not to testify or put on evidence at trial, the failure to do so
could not be used against him, and that at trial the jury would have to return a unanimous verdict
before he could be found guilty or not guilty.
          Defendant specifically acknowledged understanding these rights. He reaffirmed his
understanding that by entering a plea of guilty there would be no trial and he would be waiving or
giving up the rights that the Court explained.
          G. Offenses Charged and Factual Basis for the Guilty Plea
          Defendant was read in open court Counts One and Two of the Superseding Indictment and
was provided an explanation of technical terms used in the Superseding Indictment to describe the

                                                   6
        Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 7 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


charges. Defendant was also provided an explanation of the elements of the offenses. Defendant
expressed that he understood the charges in Counts One and Two and the elements of the offenses,
and what the Government would have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt if he were to go to trial.
        The Government explained the factual basis for the offenses and the evidence it would
present if this case were to proceed to trial. Upon questioning, Defendant admitted to the facts,
constituting all the elements of the offenses charged. Defendant admitted that he was pleading
guilty because he is in fact guilty. Defendant pled guilty as to Counts One and Two of the
Superseding Indictment.
        IV.    Conclusion
        Defendant appeared before me, by consent, pursuant to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedures and entered a plea of guilty as to Counts One and Two of the Superseding
Indictment.
        After cautioning and examining Defendant under oath and in open court concerning each
of the subject matters in Rule 11, the Court finds that the defendant, Argenis Oscar Bones-Colón,
is fully competent and capable of entering this guilty plea, is aware of the nature of the charges
and the maximum statutory penalties these carry, understands that the charges are supported by
evidence and a basis in fact, has admitted to the facts and the elements of the offenses, and has
done so in an intelligent and voluntary manner with knowledge of the consequences of his guilty
plea.
        I recommend that the Court accept the guilty plea and that Defendant be adjudged guilty
as to Counts One and Two of the Superseding Indictment.
        IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
        This Report and Recommendation is issued pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) and Rule
72 (d) of the Local Rules of this Court. Any objections to the same must be specific and must be
filed within fourteen (14) days of its receipt. Failure to file timely and specific objections to the
Report and Recommendation is a waiver of the right to review by the District Judge. United States
v. Valencia-Copete, 792 F. 2d 4 (1st Cir. 1986).




                                                   7
      Case 3:21-cr-00280-ADC-GLS Document 90 Filed 05/26/23 Page 8 of 8
USA v. Bones-Colón
Cr. No. 21-280 (ADC)
Report and Recommendation on Guilty Plea


         A sentencing hearing will be scheduled by the presiding judge, Hon. Aida M. Delgado-
Colón.
         In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 26th day of May 2023.


                                                     s/Giselle López-Soler
                                                     GISELLE LÓPEZ-SOLER
                                                     United States Magistrate Judge




                                                 8
