                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                             DISTRICT OF MAINE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,              )
                                       )
                                       )
                                       )
                   v.                  )
                                       ) 2:18-cr-00040-JDL-01
LAMALE LAWSON,                         )
                                       )
                                       )
      Defendant.                       )


            ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS

      Defendant Lamale Lawson is charged with possessing a firearm as a felon, in

violation of 18 U.S.C.A. §§ 922(g)(1) and 924(a) (2018). Lawson has moved to suppress

all evidence obtained when agents from the Maine Drug Enforcement Agency

(“MDEA”) searched a bedroom closet in the apartment of his girlfriend, “N.N.” (ECF

No. 15). For the reasons that follow, I deny the motion.

                          I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

      In March 2016, Special Agent Josh McDonald, of the MDEA, began

investigating Lawson’s alleged involvement in trafficking drugs and firearms. See

ECF No. 16 at 1. Special Agent McDonald and other agents learned that Lawson

would occasionally stay at N.N.’s apartment, and agents made two controlled

purchases of heroin from Lawson at N.N.’s housing complex.            Special Agent

McDonald also learned that Lawson would use N.N.’s vehicle in the course of his

alleged drug trafficking. After obtaining a search warrant for the location data

associated with Lawson’s cell phone, Special Agent McDonald confirmed that Lawson
had taken N.N.’s car to New York in late July 2016. See id. at 1-2. Using the same

location data, on July 31, 2016, MDEA agents intercepted Lawson in the same

vehicle, driving northbound in Maine. See id. at 2. Although a search of Lawson and

the vehicle revealed no drugs, Lawson was arrested that day on state drug trafficking

charges based on the prior controlled purchases, as well as a federal charge as a felon

in possession of a firearm.

      Also on July 31, Special Agent McDonald and two other officers spoke with

N.N. at her apartment. See id. N.N. told the agents that Lawson stayed with her

and kept some of his property in her apartment, and she then signed a written

consent form that granted the agents permission to search her entire bedroom. See

id.; see also ECF No. 15 at 2. She took the agents to her bedroom, which had two

closets with sliding doors. See ECF No. 16 at 2, July 27 Hearing Tr. at 16:18-18:13.

N.N. pointed to the left-side closet and, as testified to by Special Agent McDonald,

said “that’s where he [keeps] his stuff.” Tr. at 22:6-22:9. Special Agent McDonald

slid open the unlocked closet door, shined a flashlight on the floor, and immediately

recognized a gun case. See id. at 23:5-23:23. Special Agent McDonald observed that

the case was slightly open, and what appeared to be a silver handgun was visible.

See id. at 24:12-24:20. N.N. told the agents that she did not know the gun was in the

closet. See id. at 25:25-26-2.

      After the agents discovered the gun, N.N. pointed them towards a safe, which

was located under her bed, and told them that it belonged to Lawson. See ECF No.

16 at 2. She told the agents that “if he [Lawson] had drugs, they would be in the



                                           2
safe.” Id. at 2-3; see also Tr. at 27:4-27:7. Special Agent McDonald then bent down

and visually confirmed that there was a safe under the bed. See Tr. at 26:18-26:22.

        After discovering the handgun and safe in N.N.’s bedroom, the agents applied

for and obtained a search warrant, which was issued by a Judge of the State of Maine

District Court.

                                    II. LEGAL ARGUMENT

        The Fourth Amendment guarantees “[t]he right of the people to be secure in

their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and

seizures.” U.S. Const. amend. IV. Lawson argues that the warrantless closet search

was unreasonable. It follows, Lawson contends, that both the evidence discovered

during the initial closet search, and the search that followed the issuance of the

search warrant (which was supported in part by the evidence discovered during the

initial search) must be suppressed.1

        “[U]nder the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments [] a search conducted

without a warrant issued upon probable cause is per se unreasonable . . . subject only

to a few specifically established and well-delineated exceptions.” Schneckloth v.

Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 219 (1973) (internal quotation marks omitted and

emphasis added). It is “well settled that one of the specifically established exceptions

to the requirements of both a warrant and probable cause is a search that

is conducted pursuant to consent.” Id. Thus, officers do not need a search warrant




 1 Lawson represents that the property seized during the search conducted pursuant to the warrant included

two handguns, ammunition, mail addressed to Lawson, the safe and its contents, mobile telephones, a smart
watch, credit cards, and plastic bags. See ECF No. 15 at 3. The record, however, contains no evidence beyond
Lawson’s representations with respect to the property seized during the search.
                                                       3
when a person with the authority to consent does so freely and voluntarily. See

United States v. Jones, 523 F.3d 31, 37 (1st Cir. 2008).

      Lawson’s argument proceeds in three ways: First, he argues that N.N. lacked

apparent authority over the closet in which he kept his personal property; second, he

argues that even if N.N. did have apparent authority, the closet was outside of the

scope of the search that she had consented to; and third, he argues that if the fruits

of the closet search are suppressed and thus excised from the warrant affidavit, the

mere presence of a safe in N.N.’s bedroom, along with her statement indicating that

if Lawson had drugs, he would keep them in the safe, were insufficient grounds for

issuing a warrant. I consider each argument and conclude that the officers acted

within the scope of the consent they obtained from N.N., who was a person with

authority over the searched area. Accordingly, I need not and do not reach Lawson’s

argument with respect to whether the search warrant would have issued in the

absence of evidence obtained during the initial closet search.

A.    Apparent Authority

      “[T]he consent of one who possesses common authority over premises or effects

is valid as against the absent, nonconsenting person with whom that authority is

shared.” United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164, 170 (1974). Here, the parties agree

that N.N. was the lessor of the apartment, and the officers were aware of that fact.

They further agree that N.N. signed a written consent form permitting officers to

search her entire bedroom, which is where the relevant closet was located. See ECF

No. 16 at 2; see also ECF No. 15 at 2.



                                           4
         “As with other factual determinations bearing upon search and seizure,

determination of consent to enter must be judged against an objective standard:

would the facts available to the officer at the moment . . . warrant a man of reasonable

caution in the belief that the consenting party had authority over the premises?”

Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 188 (1990) (internal quotation marks omitted).

Common authority exists where people mutually use a property and generally have

joint access or control of the area. United States v. Meada, 408 F.3d 14, 21 (1st Cir.

2005).

         Here, at the time of the warrantless search, the agents reasonably understood

that Lawson and N.N. were a couple and they shared things, including the use of her

apartment and car. Although Lawson contends that the bedroom’s left-side closet

was his alone, at the time of the search N.N. indicated only that it was the location

in her bedroom where “he [kept] his things.” And, regardless of whether N.N. kept

any of her own items in the left-side closet, there is no evidence that should have

caused the officers to conclude that N.N. was prohibited from accessing or using the

closet. The evidence establishes that N.N. possessed no less than common authority

over the use of, and access to, the left-side closet in her bedroom. Thus, N.N. had the

authority to consent to a search of the closet.

B.       Scope of Consent

         After officers have obtained consent to search a property, a warrantless search

may not “exceed the scope of the consent granted.” United States v. Chaney, 647 F.3d

401, 405–06 (1st Cir. 2011). N.N. signed a written consent form permitting the

officers to search her entire bedroom.       Moreover, once the officers were in her

                                            5
bedroom, N.N. herself pointed them to the closet by volunteering that Lawson kept

personal items there. “The scope of the consented-to search is generally defined by

the expressed object of the search, which is measured by a test of objective

reasonableness: what would the typical reasonable person have understood by the

exchange between the officer and subject?” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).

Given that N.N. expressly pointed the officers to the closet, and the closet was within

and part of N.N.’s bedroom, it was objectively reasonable for the officers to treat the

closet as within the scope of N.N.’s consent.

                                III. CONCLUSION

      Because the agents acted within the scope of the consent they obtained from a

person with authority over the searched area, Lawson’s Motion to Suppress (ECF No.

15) is DENIED.



      SO ORDERED.

      Dated this the 15th day of August, 2018.


                                                        /s/ JON D. LEVY
                                                     U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE




                                           6
