                          IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                           FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

                        Plaintiff,
                                                              Criminal No.17-10391-RGS
       vs.

1.     ANDRES PEREZ,

                        Defendants.

     GOVERNMENT'S OPPOSITION TO DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS

       ANDRES PEREZ is charged with possessing with intent to distribute cocaine base,

including cocaine base which was seized from his anal area. He now seeks to suppress that

evidence on grounds that the police lacked reasonable suspicion to stop the Mercedes which he

was driving, because they searched the Mercedes in a private driveway, and because they

conducted a visual cavity search. These arguments all fail because the police had reasonable

suspicion that they had seen the driver of the Mercedes conduct a drug deal; because the

automobile exception does apply to PEREZ’s car when parked in someone else’s driveway; and

because the visual body cavity search was supported by reasonable suspicion that PEREZ was

hiding drugs. Following a hearing, the court should deny the motion.

I.     FACTS1


       On October 31, 2017, at approximately 10:30 am, two Revere Police detectives were

driving back to the police station in an unmarked car when they noticed an individual on a public

street. He stood out to them because he was dressed unseasonably in a t-shirt and shorts and was

acting in a noticeably agitated fashion, pacing back and forth on the public street while talking


       1
           The government anticipates that it will elicit testimony to show the following facts.
on a cell phone, and looking up and down the street as if waiting for someone. Both detectives

believed that the man had physical traits consistent with a drug abuser. The street is located in

an area right next to two main highways, an area favorable for quick drug transactions as sellers

can simply exit the highways and then get directly back on.

       The detectives shortly thereafter observed the man walk to a side street. The detectives

drove to the end of the side street, and observed the male lean into the passenger window of a

brown, two door Mercedes and then immediately walk away. The entire transaction took no

more than 15 seconds and the man was actually leaning inside the car for only a few seconds.

Although they did not see an actual exchange, based on their experience and all the surrounding

facts, the detectives believed that they had just seen a street-level drug deal.

       The detectives thereafter followed the Mercedes. They saw the Mercedes travel

eastbound on Eustis Street, make a right onto Beach Street, a left on Janvrin Avenue, and a left

on Trevalley Road. Trevalley Road ends in a T-intersection at Payson Street, which is a one way

street leading directly back to Beach Street, almost exactly where the Mercedes had been a few

moments earlier. The detectives believed that the Mercedes was conducting counter-

surveillance, which further confirmed their suspicion that the individuals in the Mercedes were

engaged in drug dealing.

       The detectives conducted a motor vehicle stop just as the Mercedes was approaching

Payson Street. The Mercedes pulled into a small driveway off Trevalley Road.2 PEREZ did not




       2
           It is unclear whether the Mercedes pulled into the driveway and then the police
activated their blue lights or whether the police activated their lights, which caused the Mercedes
to pull over. The distinction makes no difference to the analysis.
                                                  2
live in the house and told police that he was there to visit a friend.3 The vehicle held two

individuals. The driver was ANDRES PEREZ and the passenger was Cesar Alicea. During the

traffic stop, both detectives observed PEREZ handling two cell phones in a manner consistent

with him turning them off, which was consistent with trying to conceal potential drug trafficking

evidence by limiting access to the phones by the police.

       In response to a request from the detectives, PEREZ identified himself, provided the

registration for the vehicle, but said that he did not have a license. One of the detectives

conducted a records check and learned that PEREZ’s license was revoked and, because PEREZ

was going to be arrested for driving without a license, requested a marked unit for backup, which

arrived shortly thereafter. The detective asked PEREZ to step out of the vehicle in order to be

arrested. PEREZ was pat-frisked by one of the detectives (pursuant to his arrest), and the

detective found approximately $269 in various denominations, which was also consistent with

street-level dealing.

       While PEREZ was being pat-frisked, Alicea suddenly opened the passenger door and fled

on foot. The back-up officer chased Alicea to a dead end near a residence. The officer observed

Alicea stop at the dead end, take something from the front of his pants, rear back his arm, and

throw the object over a fence. The officer believed that the object was round and white. Based

on the circumstances, the officer believed the discarded object was a package of drugs. Revere

Sergeant Robert Impemba, who is also a FBI TFO (North Shore Gang Task Force), arrived on

scene to aid in the search of the backyards where the object had been thrown. 4 The sergeant


       3
          PEREZ did not provide the last name of the friend or the purpose of the alleged visit.
Police later asked a resident if PEREZ had been invited to park there and learned that PEREZ
had not; the resident also did not know the friend.
        4
           Sergeant Impemba immediately recognized PEREZ, who was sitting in the squad car,
as the subject of a prior drug investigation in which he had participated and as an associate of the
                                                  3
found a small, .25 caliber, silver pistol in the backyard of a residence, sticking in the ground as if

it had been thrown. The gun had an obliterated serial number and a round in the chamber, with a

loaded magazine nearby the gun. Alicea was also arrested.5

       The detectives called for a K-9 officer to search the vehicle, who arrived after the gun

was recovered. The dog alerted to what appeared to be a single rock of crack cocaine – about

$40 worth – wrapped in a manner consistent with distribution which was between the driver’s

seat and driver’s door. Officers also recovered multiple cellular telephones and a second license

plate from the trunk of the vehicle.6

       PEREZ and Alicea were brought to the Revere Police Station for booking. Sgt. Impemba

was aware that PEREZ and Alicea were associated with the East Side Money Gang and had

personally investigated PEREZ for PEREZ for dealing drugs including cocaine base, which

investigation included undercover buys from PEREZ. Sgt. Impemba had experience that street

drug dealers in general and gang members in particular often hid drugs in their anal areas to

avoid detection by the police.


       The police, including Sgt. Impemba, believed that PEREZ and Alicea had likely hidden

drugs in their anal areas based on the above general experience and the following specific factual

circumstances:


       1. They had observed what appeared to be a street-level drug deal in which PEREZ or
          Alicea or both was the source for the drugs;



East Side Money Gang, a violent Chelsea street gang. The government introduced evidence at
PEREZ’s detention hearing that he, and Alicea, were members of the gang.
        55
           Alicea was charged with being a felon in possession in Count Two of the Indictment in
this case. Alicea pled guilty to that charge on July 24, 2018, and is awaiting sentencing.
        6
           Revere Police would have conducted an inventory search of the Mercedes prior to
towing it, consistent to Department policy.
                                                  4
       2. After conducting the drug deal, PEREZ had driven in a manner consistent with
          counter-surveillance and/or an attempt to hid evidence;

       3. PEREZ had taken steps to conceal evidence by manipulating his phones as observed
          by the officers;

       4. PEREZ had money on him consistent with street dealing;

       5. Alicea had been armed, which would be consistent with them protecting a cache of
          drugs in the car;

       6. Alicea attempted to conceal evidence by fleeing and throwing the gun away;

       7. There was an extra license plate in the vehicle, which was consistent with the
          concealing drug activity from law enforcement;

       8. Officers found crack (wrapped for distribution) on the floor of the vehicle, which
          would be consistent with dropping drugs as they were hiding them;

       9. They had recovered only about $40 worth of drugs, which seemed inconsistent with
          the circumstances above, especially the presence of the gun; and

       10. Officers had a reasonable belief that there should be more drugs in the car than the
           single rock recovered.

Based on the above, officers had both individuals strip, bend-over, and expose that area of their

bodies. Specifically, they instructed PEREZ to place his hands on a desk and bend-over, which

exposed his buttocks. Detective Zingali craned his neck and saw something hidden in that area

of PEREZ’s body. He then removed a clear plastic bag containing numerous other clear plastic

baggies of a white, rock-like substance and a brown powdery substance—which appeared to

them, based on their training and experience, to be cocaine base and heroin packaged for street-

level distribution in multiple small plastic baggies.

II.    ARGUMENT


       1.      There Was Reasonable Suspicion For the Stop.

       Police officers are permitted to stop a vehicle based on a “reasonable suspicion” of

criminal activity, based on “specific and articulable facts.” United States v. Jones, 700 F.3d 615,

                                                  5
621 (1st Cir. 2012) (citing Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21 (1968)). While Terry typically involves

a two-part test to determine first, whether the “initial interference . . . was justified,” and second,

“whether the ensuing search was reasonabl[e] . . . ,” United States v. Ivery, 427 F.3d 69, 72 (1st

Cir. 2005), the initial stop led almost immediately to the arrest of PEREZ and the subsequent

search of the car was justified on separate grounds. Therefore, the real question here is whether

the initial stop was justified.

        The justification for the initial stop should be viewed through the “totality of the

circumstances.” United States v. Campbell, 741 F.3d 251, 261 (1st Cir. 2013) (citing United

States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417 (1981)). The implication of that lens is that “even innocuous

facts, which when taken alone may not be sufficient to create reasonable suspicion, may in

combination with other innocuous facts take on added significance.” United States v. Am, 564

F.3d 25, 30 (1st Cir. 2009) (internal citations omitted). Furthermore, in deciding to make a Terry

stop, officers are expected to use “their own expertise and specialized training.” United States v.

Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266, 273 (2002). Careful review of the several facts here demonstrated that this

traffic stop did not violate the Fourth Amendment and therefore was not unlawful.

        Here, the detective reasonably concluded that they had just seen a drug deal, which was

sufficient justification for the stop. In this case, the officers had experience with this particular

area of Revere and the manner of drug crimes which typically took place there. Specifically,

they saw a man who acted consistently with a drug user – frantic, dressed inappropriately,

holding a cell phone and looking for someone – lean into a car for about fifteen seconds. Such

conduct was entirely consistent with a drug deal. See United States v. Dubose, 579 F.3d 117,

121-22 (1st Cir. 2009) (“the fact that [the defendant] leaned his entire upper body into the car

during the interaction, and that [the defendant]’s conduct was similar to the conduct involved in



                                                   6
other drug transactions in the area” gave officers reasonable suspicion to stop); United States v.

Trullo, 809 F.2d 108, 111-12 (1st Cir. 1987) (the police stopped and searched a defendant

because they viewed his vehicle engaged in a pattern of movement consistent with a drug

transaction in a high-crime neighborhood); United States v. Rabbia, 699 F.3d 85, 90 (1st Cir.

2012) (drug related concerns sufficient for Terry stop), citing United States v. Miller, 959 F.2d

1535, 1539 (11th Cir. 1992) (drug transactions in which “supplier arrived by car, [the customer]

got in the car, the car drove around the block during which time the exchange of drugs for money

occurred, and then the car returned to the residence and dropped [the customer] off); United

States v. Allah, 994 F. Supp. 2d 148, 154 (D. Mass. 2014) (finding reasonable suspicion where

officer saw a new-looking Chevrolet acting in a manner consistent with drug dealing in a high

drug-crime area).

       The police officers’ reasonable conclusion is buttressed by additional, relevant facts. The

stop occurred in a high-crime area. Presence in a high-crime area, although insufficient on its

own, is “clearly a consideration a police officer may use to decide to make a Terry stop.” Am,

564 F.3d at 30 (the defendant’s presence in a high-crime area, combined with other factors, was

sufficient to justify a stop and pat-down). The defendant was in a recent model Mercedes, a type

of vehicle often associated with drug transactions in this area. See Allah, 994 F. Supp. 2d at 154

(a new-looking Chevrolet in a high drug crime area); United States v. Santiago Vega, 228 F.

Supp. 2d 2, 9 (D.P.R. 2002) (reasonable suspicion where a late model black Mercedes Benz SUV

in a high crime area contained a defendant behaving suspiciously). Finally, the car appeared to

perform counter-surveillance, another factor that supports a conclusion that the occupants had

just completed a drug and were engaged in ongoing criminal activity.




                                                 7
         2.     The Search of the Mercedes Was Justified, Regardless of Where The Police
                Stopped PEREZ.

         “The ‘automobile exception’ to the Fourth Amendment’s search warrant requirement

provides that ‘[i]f there is probable cause to believe that a vehicle contains evidence of criminal

activity, agents can search without a warrant any area of the vehicle in which evidence may be

found.’” United States v. Mott-Frye, 251 F. Supp. 3d 310, 315 (D. Mass. 2017), citing United

States v. Polanco, 634 F. 3d 39, 42 (1st Cir. 2011); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925).

In this case, the long list of factors above, including observations of the drug deal, the counter-

surveillance (and opportunity for concealment that it provided), PEREZ’s two phones, his

attempts to conceal the phones, Alicea fleeing, and Alicea attempting to conceal evidence, all

give ample probable cause for the police to search the car. Moreover, the police required no

specific exigency to justify the search. United States v. Panitz, 907 F.2d 1267, 1271-72 (1st Cir.

1990).

         PEREZ argues that the motor vehicle exception to the search warrant requirement “does

not extend to a vehicle parked in a public driveway,” Def.’s Mem. at 4, citing Collins v. Virginia,

-- U.S. --, 138 S. Ct. 1663 (2018). Collins does not apply to this case. Collins presented the

question whether the automobile exception to the Fourth Amendment applied within the

curtilage of the defendant’s home, which included the driveway where the motor vehicle was

located. 7 Id. at 1669. PEREZ cannot avail himself of the home’s curtilage because it was not

his home. Notably, PEREZ never asserts that he lived there or was even an invited guest. As a

result, the heightened protection for the home, which the curtilage seeks to protect, is not


         7
        Collins did not define how far down the driveway the curtilage extends; in the case, the
motor vehicle (a motorcycle) was parked at the top of the driveway, next to a side door to the
house. Id. at 1671. Because PEREZ has no Fourth Amendment interest in the curtilage of the
house where he parked, it does not matter where in the driveway he parked.
                                                  8
implicated here. In other words, PEREZ lacks standing to make this argument. See id., 1668 fn.

1.

       This case is controlled by United States v. Goncalves, where the First Circuit affirmed

application of the motor vehicle exception to a search of the defendant’s car parked in a private

driveway (the defendant’s mother’s) and unoccupied by anyone who might drive it away. 642

F.3d 249, 251 (1st Cir. 2011). The Court declined to create a per se rule against warrantless

searches in a driveway. Id.; see also United States v. Moscatiello, 771 F.2d 589, 599-600 (1st

Cir. 1985) (upholding search of automobile parked in a private driveway, not the defendant’s

driveway, after police had pursued the automobile into the driveway), vacated on other grounds

by Murray v. United States, 487 U.S. 533 (1988).

       The search of the Mercedes was also justified as an inventory search. Inventory searches

“are now a well-defined exception to the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment.”

Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 371 (1987). These searches are “justified based on

community caretaking functions, including, for example, the protection of property, the flow of

traffic, and the safety of the public and police.” United States v. Mensah, 796 F. Supp. 2d 265,

268 (D. Mass. 2011) (citations omitted). Inventory searches are permissible under the Fourth

Amendment where police have lawfully impounded the defendant’s vehicle and the search is

carried out pursuant to a reasonable, standardized policy. South Daktoa v. Opperman, 428 U.S.

364, 372 (1976).

       Here, both PEREZ was arrested, 8 as well as Alicea, leaving no one to drive the car.

“Case law supports the view that where a driver is arrested and there is no one immediately on



       8
          Having legally stopped PEREZ, the police were entitled to ask him to present
identification, from which interaction they learned the PEREZ was driving illegally, which was a
criminal offense. “[O]fficers may order the driver and any passengers to get out of the car until
                                                9
hand to take possession, the officials have a legitimate non-investigatory reason for impounding

the car.” United States v. Coccia, 446 F.3d 223, 240, n. 7 (1st Cir. 2006) (citing Vega-

Encarnacion v. Babilonia, 344 F.3d 37, 41 (1st Cir. 2003)). In fact, the Mercedes was blocking

the driveway, which was another reason why the car had to be towed. In connection with the

towing, it was the practice of the Revere police to conduct an inventory search.

       3.      The Visual Body Cavity Search Was Justified.


       In the first place, probable cause is not needed to perform a strip or visual body cavity

search performed pursuant to a lawful arrest. Swain v. Spinney, 117 F.3d 1, 5-7 (1st Cir. 1997).

All the police must do is show that they had "reasonable suspicion that the arrestee was

concealing contraband or weapons" in the areas being searched. Swain, 117 F.3d at 6. Relevant

factors include the nature of the offense, the items that are the object of the search, and the

likelihood these items may be so concealed. The inquiry is a practical one, calling for a Asensible

assessment of the circumstances.@ United States v. Cofield, 391 F.3d 334, 336-37 (1st Cir.

2004). See generally Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 559 (1979) (reasonableness of an intrusive

search requires consideration of "the scope of the particular intrusion, the manner in which it is

conducted, the justification for initiating it, and the place in which it is conducted").

       In drug cases, strip searches are per se justified because A[i]t is common knowledge that

controlled substances often are concealed on the person of users and dealers alike." Burns v.

Loranger, 907 F.2d 233, 238-39 (1st Cir. 1990). See also United States v. Barnes, 506 F.3d 58,

62 (1st Cir. 2007) (AThe initial strip search for contraband and weapons was clearly justified

given Barnes's arrest for a drug trafficking crime@); United States v. Doutre, 2009 WL 1211048



the traffic stop is complete.” United States v. Fernandez, 600 F.3d 56, 59 (1st Cir. 2010) (citing
Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 415 (1997)).
                                                  10
(D. Mass. 2009) (Saris J.) (ABecause Doutre was arrested for a drug trafficking crime, the police

were justified in conducting a strip search@).

       In this case, the police executed a visual bodily cavity search. “[A]lthough sometimes

varying in labels, courts tend to distinguish between (1) a simple strip search involving removal

of all or virtually all clothes, (2) a visual inspection of genitals or buttocks requiring some

change in posture of the body (for example, the subject might be forced to bend over and spread

his buttock cheeks), and (3) an actual manual intrusion into such orifices.” United States v.

McGhee, 627 F.3d 454, 457 (1st Cir. 2010), on reh'g, 651 F.3d 153 (1st Cir. 2011). When the

search extends to body cavities, more than the simple fact of a drug arrest is required. Barnes,

506 F.3d at 62 (requiring a "more particularized suspicion that contraband is concealed" to

justify visual body cavity search); Swain, 117 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir.1997) (“[T]he reasonable

suspicion standard governs strip and visual body cavity searches in the arrestee context....”). The

suspicion must also be specific to the individual being searched. Roberts v. Rhode Island, 239

F.3d 107, 110 (1st Cir. 2001) (A[O]fficers [must] have a reasonable suspicion that a particular

detainee harbors contraband prior to conducting a ... visual body cavity search.@). See also

Hunter v. Auger, 672 F.2d 668, 675 (8th Cir.1982) (strip and visual body cavity search required

reasonable suspicion that "drugs or other contraband are concealed in the particular place [prison

officials] decide to search"); Kraushaar v. Flanigan, 45 F.3d 1040, 1046 (7th Cir.1995) (holding

search reasonable where defendant made gestures as if attempting to hide something in his

pants).9



       9
         The cases also require consideration of the manner in which the search is conducted,
with attention to whether it exceeds reasonable bounds or is done in a needlessly humiliating
fashion or with improper motivation. E.g., Roberts v. Rhode Island, 239 F.3d 107, 113 (1st Cir.
2001); Swain, 117 F.3d at 8. There are no such concerns here.

                                                  11
       Application of these principles here show that the search was reasonable. The police

reasonably believed that PEREZ was dealing drugs, which his known criminal history

confirmed; they were aware that Alicea had possessed a gun, which suggested they may have

possessed a large quantity of drugs in need of protection; in contrast, they had found only a very

small quantity of drugs; they were aware that PEREZ engaged in counter-surveillance, which

would have provided an opportunity to secrete drugs; they saw PEREZ attempting to hide his

phones and Alicea attempting to dispose of evidence; and they were generally aware that gang

members, including ESMG members, concealed drugs in their anal areas. E.g., Cofield, 391

F.3d at 336-37 (upholding strip search of arrestee who had pending heroin and armed assault

charges and whose had a bag of heroin in his pocket); United States v. Logan, 219 Fed. Appx.

293 (7th Cir. 2007) (upholding strip search of individual arrested for drug possession who had

recently sold drugs to an undercover agent and where police had recovered two bags of

marijuana and a bag of crack from defendant’s car and person).10




10
  Removing the plastic baggie, once observed, did not constitute a manual bodily cavity search.
See, e.g., United States v. Gray, No. Cr. 10-10075-PBS, 2010 WL 5128369, at *3 (D. Mass. Dec.
10, 2010).



                                                12
III.   CONCLUSION


       For the reasons discussed above, the government respectfully requests that the Court

deny defendant’s motion to suppress.

                                                      Respectfully submitted,

                                                      ANDREW E. LELLING
                                                      United States Attorney

                                                      By: /s/ Timothy E. Moran
                                                      TIMOTHY E. MORAN
                                                      MICHAEL J. CROWLEY
                                                      Assistant U.S. Attorneys
Date: August 1, 2018

                                  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

        I hereby certify that this document filed through the ECF system will be sent
electronically to the registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic Filing (NEF).




                                              /s/ Timothy E. Moran
                                              TIMOTHY E. MORAN
                                              Assistant United States Attorney



Date: August 1, 2018




                                                 13
