                      IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                        FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
         Plaintiff                                 Criminal No. 17-507, [CCC]
          V.

Luis R. Martínez Rivera
         Defendant



                            SENTENCING MEMORANDUM
  To the Court:

   Come now, the above captioned defendant, by and through undersigned attorney
and states, alleges and requests:

   1. The defendant, a 40-year-old man, has worked for the most part of his adult life
and has “some university” schooling. His family gave him the best rearing and
education they could, at their home and environment. The defendant has never faced
emotional, nor mental history, has no drug use at all. He has procured to survive, as
best he could. Always trying to build a better environment for his family; that is, his
seven year old daughter and her grandmother; whom currently live with him under
his care. He was doing well, till his arrest. His economic solvency has always been at
issue. That’s why, a few years ago, he shose to leave his “home”, at Caguas, Puerto
Rico and relocate. Before then, his family life, economic means were a constant
turmoil. He left and ever since he has been trying hard to make ends meet.

   2. After such time, that the defendant, relocated to mainland United States,
specifically at Florida, and has, ever since, lived and worked there, from 2011. He has
had a fruitful, tranquil life and gainful employment; till he needed to return to Puerto
Rico, to face this case. He travelled and self-surrendered. Before these issues which
now concern his criminal exposition, the defendant had never involved himself in any

                                           1
criminal conspiracy activity at all. He has never consumed controlled substances. But
for the short period within his regretful conduct which led to his conviction, the
defendant let a clean life. Albeit not free from some issues, before leaving Puerto Rico,
to which he was brought to respond, by the Puerto Rico legal system and was not
found responsible for any criminal activity. The same cannot be said for financial and
child support issues.

   3. Arrested and Indicted; he immediately realized where he failed All he wanted
was to enhance his family’s wellbeing. Not hurt them nor become a delinquent! He
accepted his responsibility without any further considerations. He pled guilty as per
the best offered plea agreement. He has suffered for having poor judgement. It has
been devastating experience of not searching at home, for the solace and dreams of a
better day, he once, and again, has sought. But has suffered intensely for his family’s
sorrow caused by his actions.

   4. The defendant has admitted to the facts and stressed: his repentance. Despair,
ignorance and lack of true knowledgeable reasoning, brought the defendant to wrong
actions and results. The course of action, that resulted in criminal conduct, which has
actually brought sorrow and a worsening of his own and family’s wellbeing.

   5. In his mind, he acted in despair, seeking to define his future where he could
live, work, strive in peace, respond to old obligations to his children. Peer pressure
and not being able to care for his children and family brought about his bad and
regrettable judgement. All he has done; as his perspective allows, is insist in seeking
an opportunity to provide his family a better life. He has never had the intent to do
harm or encroach in governmental subsidy. These wishful pursuits then, by his
actions, far from being attainable, did make matters worse. This has been understood
by the defendant and reflects his remorse and repentance for his actions in this case.
He is not negating or excusing his responsibility to our community and its law. The
only close victims who are, besides our community, those for which he has so hard
tried to make a better life; his children and his parents are the real losers. This was
not part of their routine.      Neither was it what defendant sought. Additionally,



                                           2
defendant’s children’s loss of a potential provider, as an emotional and economical
centerpiece.

   6. He will promptly respond, at least what was agreed to, within his plea
agreement. If the court so allows. We request nothing beyond what we bargained for.
Nevertheless, we do rely on the court’s discretion and belief the court can consider
what pressure is placed unto a defendant to, either go to trial, or accept a plea.
Sometimes, there aren’t many options. No matter what logic, legal reasoning is
involved, to counter offer; if these counteroffers are not what the government is
willing to accept. So, while remorse, regret, and acceptance are a integral part of the
plea negotiation; the virtue of acceptance of responsibility, sometimes must accept a
course of action the government can offer to satisfy an agreement; which otherwise
cannot be had.

   7. Life has more than one way of seeing human endeavor. Maybe defendant’s case
could be seen as a belated wrong and trivial response to his children’s belated need
for parental support. He saw a myopic world. He was struggling to stay well and
maintain his wellbeing; that is, get enough money to respond to his needs and his
children. The world, he developed into since born, was that of, somewhat, full of needs
and interrogations. The outside world was like a bad TV, dark comedy series. Series
of nice and beautiful homes, yachts, good rums, cars, adventures, beautiful women
and luxury were only palpable in TV, and an outside world he could somehow see but
not touch. He was simply poor; no matter how you cut, dice, and scramble it. He was
poor emotionally, economically, educationally and most likely his ignorance was
bolstered by the stigma of how, we the people see our peers: the housing project
stigma, poor people, and all circumstances and prejudice which permeate our societal
environment.

   8. We too, face sometimes, circumstances which menace our way of life, our
wellbeing. But we have been luckier than most; including the defendant. We have some
education, some economic “advantage”; but mainly whether poor, rural country living,
cheap low-class projects, etc. mostly we had parents who cared and struggled
throughout their lives to make us better. To educate and give us an opportunity to

                                          3
raise above them. Be better humans, social beings and to pursue a family consonant
with the societal growth into safety, education and love of life and the respect of our
laws. These, the defendant lacked. He did not have the ingredients to fight beyond his
familiar world. There he saw money could be had, he must have had a sense of being,
belonging. The agreeing to procure the firearms deals, “helped” him muster and cope
with everyday life’s economic stress. This peer pressure was greater than he could
then reason; even if it meant losing his liberty, youth, freedom as we know it, to go
about our lives without feeling being put down, rejected and at least being able to
cope with life as it presents itself; not feeling the extreme need for subterfuge from
everyday life.

   9. This is the world which many of our young, less fortunate defendants face and
cannot, for themselves describe. They cannot “see” themselves before they face once,
twice, or more times, the wrath of law. At that time their liberty, family, way of life
becomes reality. They sometimes struggle to face themselves, face the world as is,
before realizing that they got there, by their own circumstances and wrong doings.

   10. But we, the people, better equipped to see ourselves in this world, sometimes
cannot see where we have failed as a society. Where we make assumptions and take
for granted, our need to structure a way of life, without seeing defendant’s world. In
that world, rehabilitation, punishment, respect for the law, and all other legal
concepts, are not the same we believe in our world. We take for granted, that it is as
it should be. But sometimes we assume expertise, all science and its use, as structured
and non-fallible. It has been proven, time and again, that our world, is also fallible.
Sometimes, and many a time, experience has shown us that justice is a piecemeal
creature which can make us grow, or not. It’s a day to day experience which can
adjudicate individual responsibility, tailored case by case, under the circumstances of
each individual.

   11. We must see ourselves as well. Are we doing all we can do, to understand what
we are faced with? Has our society done what it could? We now face this case. This is
an individual in a world which has formatted us all, as individuals in a world full of
imperfections and contradictions. Justice was since the beginning of time, meant to

                                           4
be objective. Not subject to the tone of second guessing. To be sentenced and
punished by the theory that hearsay, unproven facts, are either a mishap of another
court system, or a miscarriage of law, even when our legal system has approved such
legal theory, to mean reliable “facts” and therefore usable for sentencing purposes,
we believe ought not occur. It seems to contradict the rigor in our legal system, which
is to put into evidence every piece of fact, circumstance, under the light of our court
system’s processes to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, before it can come into
play to determine the guilt or innocence of a defendant. Sentencing should be no
different. Sentencing should not be a catch all process, to mend whatever may have
not been done, or not done well, in another forum. Sentencing ought to be for the
proven facts, agreed facts, which were present under scrutiny in the procedure now
in place.

    12. These conflicting perceptions seem to implicate that we are facing two worlds,
with different sets of rules, to validate justice. We must agree that justice is naturally
of human bondage. That is, we cannot depart from our human imperfections, wants,
needs and our created structure to stablish peace, order, security and laws that will
convey socially accepted conduct, to a degree sometimes not well set, understood and
ever changing to meet new standards as life changes. The complexity of social
conduct, sometimes, needs to consider what it is that we want to regulate and to what
extent such regulation helps, or not, the needs of our social environment. Our
kaleidoscopic social structure and all its members are part of a world that today seems
confusing and unjust to all. We all should strive to make sense of what we do, in the
best interest of a healing process within social growth. There are some, that need more
attention than others. Some need more healing than others. We all need a sense that
we are doing all we can to grow into a healthy, social environment that proposes to
serve the best interest of all; including the less fortunate of our world.

    13. To his family and community, it will take time, to face his failure and response
thereto. The law requires a reasonable sentence which considers the crime,
punishment therefore, rehabilitation opportunities and defendant’s conduct while
confronting his responsiveness to his criminal conduct. These are factors which the
Court should consider in determining the type and length of sentence as sufficient,
                                        5
but not greater than necessary, to comply with the statutory directives set forth in 18
U.S.C. § 3553(a).

   14. The primary directive in § 3553(a) is for sentencing courts to impose a
sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes set
forth in paragraph § 3553(a)(2) states that such purposes are:

   (A) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and
   to provide just punishment for the offense;

   (B) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;

   (C) To protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and

   (D) To provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training,
   medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.

   15. In determining the minimally sufficient sentence, § 3553(a) further directs
sentencing courts to consider the following factors:

   1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics
   of the defendant, (§ 3553(a)(l);

   2) The kinds of sentences available (§ 3553(a)(3);

   3) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with
   similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct (§ 3553(a)(6); and
   the need to provide restitution to any victims of the offense. (§ 3553(a)(7).

   16. Other statutory sections also give the district court direction in sentencing.
Under 18 U.S.C. § 3582, imposition of a term of imprisonment is subject to the
following limitation: in determining whether and to what extent imprisonment is
appropriate based on the § 3553(a) factors, the judge is required to recognize that
imprisonment is not an appropriate means of promoting correction and rehabilitation.
Under 18 U.S.C. § 3661, no limitation shall be placed on the information concerning
the background, character, and conduct of the defendant which a court of the United
States may receive and consider for the purpose of imposing an appropriate sentence.
This statutory language certainly overrides the (now-advisory) policy statements in

                                          6
Part H of the sentencing guidelines, which list as not ordinarily relevant to sentencing
a variety of factors such as the defendant's age, educational and vocational skills,
mental and emotional conditions, drug or alcohol dependence, etc. See U.S.S.G.5H1.
These concepts have been strengthened by case law very recently to reiterate the
courts power to exercise its discretion in the process of sentencing.

   17. We believe that a sentence, in conformity to the plea agreed upon, or by the
court’s discretion, in conformity to the Presentence statutory principles, the minimum
available, can best serve the interests and sentencing factors involved. It will promote
sending a message to others in a similar disjunctive position and probable despair.
The defendant has been punished by his conscience, shame, for what he has done and
has recognized and truly accepted his criminal conduct; harmful first to his family, to
our society and himself. Taking into account his criminal conduct and sentencing
options, as so well defined, in the Presentence Report, repentance, family history and
personal conditions and factors, seems to us, justify as reasonable the kind of
sentence discussed herein and proposed.

   18. The defendant has been on bail, since his arrest. He has travelled, as required
from and to Florida where he lives. He has complied with all bail conditions. The
defendant has been assured of a continuation of his job; as soon as he returns to
Florida. Therefore, In the event the court should consider a sentence to be served
incarcerated, the Bureau of Prisons (“BOP”)’s Security Designation and Custody
Classification Manual, Program Statement 5100.08 (“the Manual”), establishes policy
regarding inmate security-level classification. Where the judgment permits a
defendant to voluntarily surrender, three points are deducted from his Security Point
Total, which affects his eligibility for certain institutions and programs. Inmates with
lower security classifications are able to serve their sentences in lower security
institutions. Given the current over-crowding of prisons and safety concerns in high-
security institutions, the security classification can greatly impact the inmate’s
experience and promote the rehabilitative ends of sentencing. In order to warrant the
three-point reduction, the voluntary surrender cannot occur on the same day as
sentencing. We therefore do request that the defendant be allowed to self-surrender
at the institution the court may recommend, and the bureau may deem adequate and
                                         7
proper. Of course, the defendant is most willing to pay his travel expense to receive
the benefits for being allowed to self-surrender, to the institution so designated.

   19. While incarcerated, if that should be the case, the defendant hopes and looks
forward to gaining job training. The defendant does have family in the State of Florida
and hopes that such state be favorably considered and recommended by the court for
his appointment thereto.

   20. Why, from the Court we request that after consideration of the different
factors as per sentencing, a minimum sentence, be imposed, along with any other
conditions as the court may deem fit.

      I Certify: That on Monday, September 03, 2018, I electronically filed the
foregoing with the Clerk of the Court using the CM/ECF system which will send
notification of such filing to AUSA and other Defense Attorneys.

       Submitted,


       In San Juan, Puerto Rico, on September 3, 2018.


I Certify: That on Monday, September 03, 2018, I electronically filed the foregoing with
the Clerk of the Court using the CM/ECF system which will send notification of such
filing to The United States Attorney’s Office, AUSA Victor Acevedo and other Defense
Attorneys.


      Submitted, In San Juan, Puerto Rico, on September 3, 2018.


S/Wilfredo Ríos Méndez
Wilfredo Ríos Méndez,
USDC 128103
PO BOX 8334, CAGUAS, PR 00726
Tel/ Fax 787-746-4467
CEL 787-398-3284
wriosmendez@gmail.com
Attorney for defendant



                                           8
