Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 1 of 6 Page|D #: 89
AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case

 

 

 

Sheet 1
*"` RlCT COURT
United States District Cb .~¢Aw§
r~ rm ' 1 ah
District ofMaine F"l ~ 3 Fl“ED
UNITED sTATEs oF AMERICA JUDGMENT Il~i§§l éll`§IB@INFXL“`Cli\c§E
V. B‘-' l ____
THOMAS l HICKEY lll Case Number: l :-07 CR-7§- JAW OOl
USM Number: 11231-066
Entered on Docket:"'l l J\l }\COC[
Virginia G. Villa, AFD
Defendant's Attomey
THE DEFENDANT:
|Xl pleaded guilty to count(s) 1 of an Indictment
l:l pleaded nolo contendere to count(s) which was accepted by the court.
l:l was found guilty on count(s) after a plea of not guilty.
The defendant is adjudicated guilty of these offenses:
Title & Section Nature of Offense Offense Ended Count
18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(l) and Felon in Possession ofa 3/3/2006 l
924(e)(l) Firearm (Armed Career
Criminal)

The defendant is sentenced as provided in pages 2 through 6 of this judgment. The sentence is imposed pursuant to the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984.

l:l The defendant has been found not guilty on count(s)
l:l Count(s) l:l is l:l are dismissed on the motion of the United States.

lt is ordered that the defendant must notify the United States attorney for this district within 30 days of any change of name,
residence, or mailing address until all fines, restitution, costs, and special assessments imposed by this judgment are fully paid. If
ordered to pay restitution, the defendant shall notify the court and United States attorney of material changes in economic
circumstances

Jul;Lz, 2009

 

Da of I osition of Jud
llw/lll llllll ll/ll llllll§e‘rzt

Signature of Judge

 

John A. Woodcock, Jr., U.S. District Judge

 

Nam/e and Title of Judge

Jll 3 all

Date Sig*led

Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 2 of 6 Page|D #: 90
AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 2 - Imprisonmem

DEFENDANT: THOMAS l HICKEY lll
CASE NUMBER: l:()7-CR-73-JAW-O()l

Judgment_Page 2 of 6

IMPRISONMENT

The defendant is hereby committed to the custody of the United States Bureau of Prisons to be imprisoned for a
total term of 99 months.

E] The court makes the following recommendations to the Bureau of Prisons:
That the defendant be enrolled in the 500 Hour Comprehensive Drug Treatment Program.

|X| The defendant is remanded to the custody of the United States Marshal.

|:l The defendant shall surrender to the United States Marshal for this district,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|:| at |:| a.m. |:| p.m. on .
|:| as notified by the United States Marshal.
|:l The defendant shall surrender for service of sentence at the institution designated by the Bureau of Prisons.
|:| before 2 p.m. on .
|:| as notified by the United States Marshal.
|:| as notified by the Probation or Pretrial Services Office.
RETURN
I have executed this judgment as follows:
Defendant delivered on to
at , with a certified copy of this judgment

 

 

UNlTED STATES MARSHAL

By

 

DEPUTY UNITED STATES MARSHAL

Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 3 of 6 Page|D #: 91

AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3 - Supervised Release

DEFENDANT: THOMAS l HICKEY lll
CASE NUMBER; l:O7-CR-73-JAW-O()l

.ludgment_Page 3 of 6

SUPERVISED RELEASE

Upon release from imprisonment, the defendant shall be on supervised release for a term of 5 years

The Defendant must report to the probation office in the district to which the defendant is released within 72 hours of release from
the custody of the Bureau of Prisons.

The defendant shall not commit another federal, state, or local crime.

The defendant shall not unlawfully possess a controlled substance The defendant shall refrain from any unlawful use of a
controlled substance The defendant shall submit to one drug test within 15 days of release from imprisonment and at least two
additional drug tests during the term of supervision, but not more than 120 drug tests per year thereafier, as directed by the
probation officer.

l:l The above drug testing condition is suspended, based on the court's determination that the defendant poses a low risk of future
substance abuse. (Check, if applicable.)

EThe defendant shall not possess a frrearm, destructive device, or any other dangerous weapon. (Check, if applicable.)
EThe defendant shall cooperate in the collection of DNA as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

l:lThe defendant shall register with the state sex offender registration agency in the state where the defendant resides, works, or is
a student, as directed by the probation officer. (Check, if applicable.)

l:lThe defendant shall participate in an approved program for domestic violence. (Check, if applicable.)

If this judgment imposes a fine or restitution, it is a condition of supervised release that the defendant pay in accordance with the
Schedule of Payments of this judgment

The defendant must comply with the standard conditions that have been adopted by.this court as well as any additional conditions
on the attached page.

STANI)ARD CONDITIONS OF SUPERVISION

l) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district without the permission of the court or probation oHicer;

2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer and shall submit a truthful and complete written report within the first five days of each month;

3) the defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and follow the instructions of the probation oHicer;

4) the defendant shall support his or her dependents and meet other family responsibilities;

5) the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation unless excused by the probation officer for schooling, training, or other acceptable reasons;

6) the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any change in residence or employrnent;

7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not purchase, possess, use, distribute or administer any controlled substance or any
paraphernalia related to any controlled substances, except as prescribed by a physician; »

8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold, used, distributed, or administered;

9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activity, and shall not associate with any person convicted of a felony unless
granted permission to do so by the probation oHicer;

10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit him or her at any time at home or elsewhere and shall permit confiscation of any contraband
observed in plain view by the probation officer;

l 1) the defendant shall notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer;
12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a special agent of a law enforcement agency without the permission of the

court; and

13) as directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notify third parties of risks that may be occasioned by the defendant's criminal record or
personal history or characteristics, and shall permit the probation officer to make such notifications and to confirm the defendant's compliance with
such notification requirement.

Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 4 of 6 Page|D #: 92

AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 3A - Supervised Release

DEFENDANT: THOMAS l HICKEY lll
CASE NUMBER: l:O7-CR-73-JAW-OOI

JudgrnentiPage 4 of

ADDITIONAL SUPERVISED RELEASE TERMS

l. Defendant shall not use or possess any controlled substance, alcohol or
other intoxicant; and shall participate in a program of drug and alcohol
abuse therapy to the supervising officer’s satisfaction This shall include
testing to determine if Defendant has used drugs or intoxicants.
Defendant shall submit to one test within 15 days of release from prison
and at least two, but not more than 120, tests per calendar year thereafter,
as directed by the supervising officer. Defendant shall pay/co-pay for
services during such treatment to the supervising officer’s satisfaction.
Defendant shall not obstruct or tamper, or try to obstruct or tamper, in any
way, with any tests;

2. Defendant shall not own or possess any firearm or other dangerous
weapon, or knowingly be at any time in the company of anyone known by
him to possess a firearm or other dangerous weapon; and

3. Defendant shall at all times readily submit to a search of his residence, and
of any other premises under his dominion and control, by his supervising
officer, upon the officer’s request when the officer has reasonable basis to
believe that such a search will lead to the discovery of evidence of

violation of the terms of supervised release. Failure to submit to such a
search may be grounds for revocation.

Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 5 of 6 Page|D #: 93
AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criminal Case
Sheet 5 - Criminal Monetary Penalties

 

Judgment_Page 5 of 6
DEFENDANT: THOMAS l HICKEY lll

CASE NUMBER: l:O7-CR-73-JAW-001

CRIMINAL MONETARY PENALTIES

The defendant must pay the total criminal monetary penalties under the schedule of payments on Sheet 6.

Assessment Fine Restitution
Totals: $lO0.00 $0.00 $0.00
l:l The determination of restitution is deferred until . An Amended Judgment in a Criminal Case (AO 245C) will be entered after such

determination
l:l The defendant must make restitution (including community restitution) to the following payees in the amount listed below.
If the defendant makes a partial payment, each payee Shall receive an approximately proportioned payrnent, unless specified otherwise in the

priority order or percentage payment column below. However, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3664(i), all nonfederal victims must be paid before the
United States is paid.

Name of Payee Total Loss* Restitution Ordered Priority or Percentage
$ $
TOTALS $ $

 

l:l Restitution amount ordered pursuant to plea agreement $

l:l The defendant must pay interest on restitution and a fine of more than $2,500, unless the restitution or fine is paid in full before the
fifteenth day after the date of the judgment, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(f). All of the payment options on Sheet 6 may be subject
to penalties for delinquency and default, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3612(g).

l:l The court determined that the defendant does not have the ability to pay interest and it is ordered that:
l:l the interest requirement is waived for the l:l fine l:l restitution,

l:l the interest requirement for the l:l fme l:l restitution is modified as follows:

* Findings for the total amount of losses are re uired under Chapters 109A, 110, llOA, and l 13A of Title 18, United States Code, for offenses
committed on or after September 13, 1994 but efore April 23, 1996.

Case 1:07-cr-OOO73-.]AW Document 67 Filed 07/02/09 Page 6 of 6 Page|D #: 94

AO 245B (Rev. 06/05) Judgment in a Criniinal Case
Sheet 6 - Schedule of Payments

DEFENDANT: THOMAS l HICKEY lll
CASE NUMBER: l:07-CR-73-JAW-001

Judgment~Page 6 of 6

SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS

Having assessed the defendant’s ability to pay, payment of the total criminal monetary penalties are due as follows:

A |E Lump sum payment of $100.00 due immediately, balance due
IX|

Any amount that the defendant is unable to pay now is due and payable during the term of incarceration Upon release from
incarceration, any remaining balance shall be paid in monthly installments, to be initiall determined in amount by the supervising
officer. Said payments are to be made during the period of supervised release, subject a ways to review by the sentencing judge on
request, by either the defendant or the government

l:l not later than , or

l:l in accordance with l:l C, l:l D, or l:l E, or l:l Fbelow; or

B l:l Payment to begin immediately (may be combined with l:l C, l:l D, or l:l F below); or

C l:l Payrnent in equal (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g., months or years), to commence (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after the date of this judgment; or
D l:l Payrnent in equal (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly) installments of $ over a period of
(e.g., months or years), to commence (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from imprisonment to a

term of supervision; or

E l:l Payrnent during the term of supervised release will commence within (e.g., 30 or 60 days) after release from
imprisonment The court will set the payment plan based on an assessment of the defendant’s ability to pay at that time; or

F l:l Special instructions regarding the payment of criminal monetary penalties:

Unless t_he eourt_has expressl or_de_red otherwise, if this judgment imposes a period of im risonment,Fpa ment of criminal monetary penalties is
due during imprisonment A l criminal monetary enalties, except those payments made t rough the e eral Bureau of Prisons’ lnmate Financial
Responsibility Program, are made to the clerk o the court

The defendant shall receive credit for all payments previously made toward any criminal monetary penalties imposed.

l:l loint and Several

Defendant and Co-Defendant Names and Case Numbers (including defendant number), Total Amount, .loint and Several Amount, and
corresponding payee, if appropriate:

l:l The defendant shall pay the cost of prosecution
l:l The defendant shall pay the following court cost(s):
|:|

The defendant shall forfeit the defendant’s interest in the following property to the United States:

l)ayments shall be applied in the following order1 (l) assessment, (2) restitution tprincipal, (3) restitution interest, (4) fine principal, (5) fine
interest, (6) community restitution, (7) penalties, and (8) costs, including cost o prosecution and court costs.

