      Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG            Document 118       Filed 02/20/2010              Page 1 of 10



                                                       u.s. Department of Justice
                                                       Carmen M. Ortiz
                                                       United States Attorney
                                                       District ofMassachusetts


Main Reception: (617) 748-3100	                        John Joseph Moakley United States Courthouse
                                                       I Courthouse Way
                                                       Suite 9200
                                                       Boston, Massachusel/s 02210




                                                       February 11,2010

Charles A. Clifford, Esq.
Law Offices of Charles A. Clifford, Esq.
305 Main Street, Box 46
Charlestown, MA 02129

          Re:	      United States v. Quoc B. Trinh

                    No.07-cr-10047-NG


Dear Mr. Clifford:

        This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United States Attorney for the District of
Massachusetts ("the U.S. Attorney") and your client, Quoc B. Trinh ("Defendant"), in the above­
referenced case. The Agreement is as follows:

          1.	       Change of Plea

        At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall plead guilty to all counts in which he is
charged in the above-captioned Superseding Indictment: Count One (21 U.S.C. § 846 - Conspiracy
to Distribute and Possess with Intent to Distribute MDMA); and Count Two (21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(I)
and 18 U.S.c. § 2 - Possession With Intent to Distribute and Distribution of MDMA and
Methamphetamine). Defendant expressly and unequivocally admits that he committed the crimes
charged in Counts One and Two of the Superseding Indictment, did so knowingly and intentionally,
and is in fact guilty of those offenses.

          2.	       Penalties

         Defendant faces the following minimum mandatory and maximum penalties:

        Count One:      Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. §§ 841 (b)(l)(C) and 846, Defendant faces a maximum
20-year tenn of incarceration; a maximum fine of $1,000,000; a 3-year minimum tenn of supervised
release, not to exceed life; a mandatory special assessment of $1 00; and drug forfeiture as alleged in
the Superseding Indictment.
    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG         Document 118         Filed 02/20/2010      Page 2 of 10



       Count Two: Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 841 (b)(l)(A)(viii), Defendant faces a 10-year
mandatory minimum term of incarceration, not to exceed life; a maximum fine of $4,000,000; a 5­
year minimum term of supervised release, not to exceed life; a mandatory special assessment of
$100; and drug forfeiture as alleged in the Superseding Indictment.

        Defendant may also be deportable and/or excludable by the United States Immigration and
Customs Enforcement as a consequence of his conviction of the offenses to which he is pleading
guilty.

       3.	     Sentencing Guidelines

       The sentence to be imposed upon Defendant is within the discretion of the District Court
("Court"), subject to the statutory mandatory minimum and maximum penalties set forth above, the
provisions ofthe Sentencing Reform Act, and the United States Sentencing Guidelines promulgated
thereunder. The Sentencing Guidelines are advisory, not mandatory and, as a result, the Court may
impose a sentence up to and including the statutory maximum term of imprisonment and statutory
maximum fine. In imposing the sentence, the Court must consult and take into account the
Sentencing Guidelines, along with the other factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a).

       The parties will take the following joint positions at sentencing:

       (a)	    The parties agree that 958.4 grams of a mixture and substance containing MDMA
               and a detectable amount of methamphetamine is attributable to Defendant pursuant
               to USSG § 201.1 (c)(4), and therefore his Base Offense Level is 32.

       (b)	    The parties agree that 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(l)(A)(viii) applies to Defendant.

       (c)	    The parties take no position with respect to Defendant's Criminal History Category.

       (d)	    The parties agree to recommend that the term of incarceration imposed upon
               Defendant should be concurrent with the term of incarceration to be imposed upon
               Defendant in Cases Nos. 07-cr-10048-WGY and 07-cr-1 0049-WGY, in which
               Defendant's sentencing is scheduled to occur on March 3, 20 I O.

       The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that there is no basis for a departure from the
Sentencing Guidelines or for a sentence outside the Guidelines under the factors set forth in 18
U.S.c. §3553(a). Accordingly, neither the U.S. Attorney nor Defendant will seek a departure from
the Sentencing Guidelines or a sentence outside the Guidelines.

        Based on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the offenses of
conviction in this case, and information known to the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S. Attorney
agrees to recommend that the Court reduce by three levels Defendant's Adjusted Offense Level
under USSG §3E1.1.


                                                2
    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG         Document 118         Filed 02/20/2010       Page 3 of 10



       The U.S. Attorney specifically reserves the right not to recommend a reduction under USSG
§3E1.1 if, at any time between his execution of this Agreement and sentencing Defendant:

               (a)    Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the plea;

               (b)    Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the offenses of conviction;

               (c)    Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant conduct for which Defendant
                      is accountable under USSG §1B 1.3;

               (d)    Fails to provide truthful information about his financial status;

               (e)    Gives false or misleading testimony in any proceeding relating to the criminal
                      conduct charged in this case and any relevant conduct for which Defendant
                      is accountable under USSG §IB1.3;

               (f)    Engages in acts which form a basis for finding that Defendant has obstructed
                      or impeded the administration ofjustice under USSG §3C 1.1;

               (g)    Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates any condition of release;

               (h)    Commits a crime;

               (i)    Transfers any asset protected under any provision of this Agreement; or

               U)     Attempts to withdraw his guilty plea.

        Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his plea of guilty if, for any of
the reasons listed above, the U.S. Attorney does not recommend that he receive a reduction in
Offense Level for acceptance of responsibility.

        Defendant expressly understands that, in addition to declining to recommend an acceptance­
of-responsibility adjustment, the U.S. Attorney may seek an upward adjustment pursuant to USSG
§3C 1.1 if Defendant obstructs justice after the date of this Agreement.

       4.	     Sentence Recommendation

       The U.S. Attorney agrees to recommend the following sentence before the Court:

               (a)	   Incarceration for 10 years, to be imposed concurrently with the sentence to
                      be imposed on Defendant by the Court in Cases Nos. 07-cr-l0048-WGY and
                      07-cr-l0049-WGY;



                                                3

    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG          Document 118          Filed 02/20/2010        Page 4 of 10



               (b)	    Fine within the applicable Guideline range, unless the U.S. Attorney
                       detennines that a sufficient fine has been imposed on Defendant in Cases
                       Nos. 07-cr-l0048-WGY and 07-cr-l0049-WGY;

               (c)	    Forfeiture as set forth in Paragraph 10;

               (d)	    Mandatory special assessment of $200;

               (e)	    Supervised release within the applicable Guideline range, to be imposed
                       concurrently with the tenn ofsupervised release to be imposed on Defendant
                       by the Court in Cases Nos. 07-cr-10048-WGY and 07-cr-l0049-WGY.

       5.	     Payment of Mandatory Special Assessment

        Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to the Clerk of the Court on or
before the date of sentencing, unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that
Defendant is financially unable to do so.

       6.	     Protection of Assets for Payment of Restitution, Forfeiture and Fine

        Defendant agrees not to transfer, or authorize the transfer of, any asset which has been
restrained by Order ofthe Court in this case or any asset, whether or not restrained, which Defendant
has agreed to forfeit pursuant to this Agreement.

        Defendant agrees not to transfer, or authorize the transfer of any other asset in which he has
an interest without prior express written consent of the U.S. Attorney, except for:

               (a)	    Assets subject to superior, secured interests of innocent third parties, in which
                       Defendant has an equity interest of less than $5,000;

               (b)	    Ordinary living expenses necessary to house, clothe, transport and feed
                       Defendant and those to whom he owes a legal duty of support, so long as
                       such assets do not exceed $1,000 per month; and

               (c)	    Attorney's fees incurred in connection with this criminal case.

       This prohibition shall be effective as of the date of Defendant's execution ofthis Agreement
and continue until the fine and forfeiture ordered by the Court at sentencing are satisfied in full.

       Defendant further agrees that, prior to sentencing, he will truthfully and accurately complete
a sworn financial statement as provided in Paragraph 10.

       7.	     Waiver of Rights to Appeal and to Bring Collateral Challenge.


                                                  4

Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG      Document 118          Filed 02/20/2010       Page 5 of 10



        (a)	   Defendant has conferred with his attorney and understands that he has the
               right to challenge both his conviction and his sentence on direct appeal.
               Defendant also understands that he may, in some circumstances, be able to
               argue that his conviction and/or sentence should be set aside or reduced in a
               collateral challenge, such as pursuant to a motion under 28 U.S.C. §2255 or
               18 U.S.C. §3582(c).

        (b)	   Defendant waives any right he has to challenge his conviction on direct
               appeal or by collateral challenge.

        (c)	   Defendant agrees that he will neither file a direct appeal nor collaterally
               challenge any imprisonment sentence of 120 months or less. This provision
               is binding even if the Court employs a Guidelines analysis different from that
               set forth in this Agreement.

        (d)	   The U.S. Attorney likewise agrees that, regardless of the analysis employed
               by the Court, she will not appeal any imprisonment sentence of 120 months
               or more.

  8.	   Other Post-sentence Events

        (a)	   In the event that, notwithstanding the waiver provision of Paragraph 7(c),
               Defendant appeals or collaterally challenges his sentence, the U.S. Attorney
               reserves the right to argue the correctness of the sentence imposed by the
               Court in addition to arguing that any appeal or collateral challenge is waived
               as a result of the waiver in Paragraph 7.

        (b)	   If notwithstanding the waiver provision of Paragraph 7(c), Defendant seeks
               re-sentencing, he agrees that he will not seek to be re-sentenced with the
               benefit of any change to the criminal history category that the Court
               calculated at the time of Defendant' s original sentencing, except to the extent
               that he has been found actually factually innocent of a prior crime. Thus, for
               example, Defendant will not seek to be re-sentenced based on the setting
               aside of a prior state-court conviction that occurs after sentencing unless he
               has been found actually factually innocent of that prior crime.

        (c)	   In the event of a re-sentencing following an appeal from or collateral
               challenge to Defendant's sentence, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to
               seek a departure from the Sentencing Guidelines and a sentence outside the
               Sentencing Guidelines if, and to the extent, necessary to reinstate the sentence
               advocated by the U.S. Attorney at Defendant's initial sentencing pursuant to
               this Agreement.

  9.	   Court Not Bound by Agreement

                                          5
     Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG           Document 118          Filed 02/20/2010        Page 6 of 10




        The sentencing recommendations made by the parties and their respective calculations under
the Sentencing Guidelines are not binding upon the U.S. Probation Office or the Court. Within the
maximum sentence which Defendant faces under the applicable law, the sentence to be imposed is
within the sole discretion of the Court. Defendant's plea will be tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim.
P. II(c)(l)(B). Defendant may not withdraw his plea of guilty regardless of what sentence is
imposed. Nor may Defendant withdraw his plea because the U.S. Probation Office or the Court
declines to follow the Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations of the parties. In the
event that the Court declines to follow the Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations
of the u.s. Attorney, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to defend the Court's calculations and
sentence in any subsequent appeal or collateral challenge.

        10.     Forfeiture

        Defendant will forfeit to the United States any and all assets subject to forfeiture pursuant
to 21 U.S.C. § 853 as a result of his guilty plea. The assets to be forfeited may include, but are not
limited to, vehicles, cash, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, tangible and intangible personal
property and real estate. Defendant admits that all such assets are subject to forfeiture on the
grounds that they constitute, or are derived from, proceeds of Defendant's unlawful drug activity
and/or are property used, or intended to be used, to commit the crime charged in the Superseding
Indictment. Defendant therefore consents to the forfeiture of all of Defendant's interests in all such
forfeitable assets to the United States. The forfeitures may be carried out criminally, civilly, or
administratively in the U.S. Attorney's discretion.

         Defendant agrees to assist law enforcement agents and government attorneys in locating,
liquidating, recovering, returning to the United States, and forfeiting all forfeitable assets, wherever
located, and in whatever names the assets may be held. Defendant shall promptly take whatever
steps are deemed necessary by the U.S. Attorney, the U.S. Marshals Service, and the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration to transfer possession of all forfeitable assets to the United States, and
to clear the United States' title to them. Such steps may include, but are not limited to, executing and
surrendering all title documents, and signing consent decrees of forfeiture, deeds, sworn statements
relating the factual bases for forfeiture, and any other documents deemed necessary by the U.S.
Attorney to complete the criminal, civil, or administrative forfeiture proceedings which may be
brought against the assets identified in this section and against any other forfeitable assets involved
in or related to any of the criminal acts charged in the Superseding Indictment.

        Defendant hereby acknowledges and agrees that the United States is not limited to forfeiture
of directly forfeitable assets, or of any assets specifically listed in this section. If the U.S. Attorney
determines that any directly forfeitable assets of Defendant cannot be located upon exercise of due
diligence, or have been transferred or sold to, or deposited with, a third party, placed beyond the
jurisdiction ofthe Court, substantially diminished in value, or commingled with other property which
cannot be divided without difficulty, then the United States shall be entitled to forfeit as "substitute
assets" any other assets of Defendant up to the value of the directly forfeitable assets fitting any of
the categories described in this sentence.

                                                    6

    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG            Document 118          Filed 02/20/2010        Page 7 of 10



        In order to assist the United States in locating and forfeiting directly forfeitable and substitute
assets, Defendant shall deliver to the U.S. Attorney within thirty days after signing this Agreement
a sworn financial statement, executed under the pains and penalties of perjury, fully and truthfully
disclosing the existence, nature and location ofall assets in which Defendant currently has any legal
or beneficial interest, and all assets over which Defendant has exercised control, or has had any legal
or beneficial interest, at any time from January 2000 to the present. At the request of the U.S.
Attorney, Defendant further agrees to be deposed and/or polygraphed with respect to Defendant's
assets.

         Forfeiture of substitute assets shall not be deemed an alteration ofDefendant' s sentence. The
forfeitures set forth herein shall not satisfy or offset any fine, restitution, cost of imprisonment, or
other penalty imposed upon Defendant, nor shall the forfeitures be used to offset Defendant's tax
liability or any other debt owed to the United States.

        In addition to all other waivers or releases set forth in this Agreement, Defendant hereby
waives any and all claims arising from or relating to the forfeitures set forth in this section,
including, without limitation, any claims arising under the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth
Amendment, or the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment, to the United States
Constitution, or any other provision of state or federal law.

        Defendant consents to the entry of orders of forfeiture for all property identified herein and
waives the requirements of Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 32.2 and 43(a) regarding notice of
the forfeiture in the charging instrument, announcement of the forfeiture at sentencing, and
incorporation of the forfeiture in the judgment. Defendant acknowledges that he understands that
the forfeiture of assets is part ofthe sentence that may be imposed in this case and waives any failure
by the court to advise him ofthis, pursuant to Rule 11 (b)(1 )(1), during the change ofpIea proceeding.

       The United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts shall retain jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this section.

        Defendant hereby waives and releases any and all claims he made, or could have made, to
all vehicles, currency, and other personal property seized by the United States, or seized by any state
or local law enforcement agency and turned over to the United States, during the investigation and
prosecution of this case, and consents to the forfeiture of all such assets.

        11.     Information For Presentence Report

       Defendant agrees to provide all information requested by the U.S. Probation Office
concerning his assets, and to provide a copy of any such information to the U.S. Attorney.

        12.     Civil Liability

       By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not compromise any civil liability,
including but not limited to any tax liability, which Defendant may have incurred or may incur as

                                                    7

    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG           Document 118         Filed 02/20/2010       Page 8 of 10



a result of his conduct and his plea of guilty to the charges specified in Paragraph 1 of this
Agreement.

        13.     Rejection of Plea by Court

       Should Defendant's guilty plea not be accepted by the Court for whatever reason, or later be
withdrawn on motion of Defendant, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the U.S.
Attorney.

        14.     Breach of Agreement

        If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to comply with any provision of
this Agreement, or has committed any crime following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S.
Attorney may, at her sole option, be released from her commitments under this Agreement in their
entirety by notifying Defendant, through counselor otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may
also pursue all remedies available to her under the law, irrespective of whether she elects to be
released from her commitments under this Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any
and all charges which have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this Agreement. Defendant
recognizes that no such breach by him of an obligation under this Agreement shall give rise to
grounds for withdrawal of his guilty plea. Defendant understands that, should he breach any
provision of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney will have the right to use against Defendant before
any grandjury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes, any statements which may be made
by him, and any information, materials, documents or objects which may be provided by him to the
government subsequent to this Agreement, without any limitation. In this regard, Defendant hereby
waives any defense to any charges which he might otherwise have based upon any statute of
limitations, the constitutional protection against pre-indictment delay, or the Speedy Trial Act.

        15.     Who Is Bound By Agreement

       This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts, and cannot
and does not bind the Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state or local
prosecutive authorities.

        16.    Complete Agreement

        This letter contains the complete and only agreement between the parties relating to the
disposition of this case. No promises, representations or agreements have been made other than
those set forth in this letter. This Agreement supersedes prior understandings, if any, of the parties,
whether written or oral with respect to the disposition ofthis case. This Agreement can be modified
or supplemented only in a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the record in court.




                                                  8

    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG        Document 118            Filed 02/20/2010   Page 9 of 10



        If this letter accurately reflects the agreement between the u.s. Attorney and Defendant,
please have Defendant sign the Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard L. Hoffman.

                                                     Very truly yours,

                                                     CARMEN M. ORTIZ
                                                     United States ~rney
                                                                  (/
                                              By:    ,   l~

                                                     );     SF. LANG
                                                     Chief, Criminal Division




                                                9

    Case 1:07-cr-10047-NG             Document 118          Filed 02/20/2010        Page 10 of 10




                        ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

         I have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it with my attorney. I hereby acknowledge
that it fully sets forth my agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for the District of
Massachusetts. I further state that no additional promises or representations have been made to me
by any official ofthe United States in connection with this matter. I understand the crimes to which
1have agreed to plead guilty, the maximum penalties for those offenses and Sentencing Guideline
provisions potentially applicable to them. I am satisfied with the legal representation provided to
me by my attorney. We have had sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed
the charges against me, possible defenses I might have, the terms of this Plea Agreement and
whether I should go to trial. I am entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly
because I am guilty of the offenses to which I am pleading guilty and I believe this Agreement is in
my best interest.




                                                         Defendant

                                                         Date:~/o

        I certify that Quoc B. Trinh has read this Agreement and that we have discussed its meaning.
I believe he understands the Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely, voluntarily and
knowingly.




                                                         Charles A. Cliffor    q.
                                                         Attorney for Quoc B. Trinh


                                                         Date:   ~~~




                                                   IO

