                                UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                     DISTRICT OF MAINE

 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                      )
                                                )
                                                )
 v.                                             )
                                                ) Docket no. 2:09-cr-00009-GZS
 DAVID WIDI,                                    )
                                                )
                                                )
                        Defendant.              )
                                                )


                      PROCEDURAL ORDER ON PENDING PETITION

       Before the Court is a petition seeking revocation of David Widi’s supervised release (ECF
No. 456). The Court hereby RESERVES RULING on this petition.
       As discussed on the record at the December 17, 2018 conference of counsel, the Court will
reserve ruling on the petition until April 17, 2019 provided that Mr. Widi: (1) complies with all of the
previously imposed terms of his supervised release, and (2) makes monthly payments of at least $20
per month towards his court-appointed counsel fees. Said payments shall be made no later than the
15th of each month with the first payment due by January 15, 2019. If Mr. Widi fails to meet these
conditions, the Court reserves the right to immediately schedule a final hearing on the pending petition
to revoke supervised release.
       Absent some additional order of this Court, the Court will hold a conference of counsel on
April 17, 2019 at 11 A.M. Counsel shall confer with Probation and the Clerk’s Office prior to this
conference to determine if the conditions outlined above have been met and the total amount that Mr.
Widi has paid toward his fees since the entry of this Order. At the conference, assuming all of the
conditions have been met and Probation for the District of New Jersey has consented to a transfer of
supervision, the Court will execute the necessary documents to transfer Widi’s supervision to the
District of New Jersey and dismiss the pending petition.
       SO ORDERED.
                                                      /s/ George Z. Singal
                                                      United States District Judge

Dated this 18th day of December, 2018.
