           Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 1 of 10 FILED
                                                                                                       In Open Coiiit
                                                                                                        USDClIvlass.
                                                                                                      D-a'2


                                                         U.S. Department of Justice

                                                         Carmen M. Ortiz
                                                         United States Attorney
                                                         District ofMassachusetts


Main Reception: (617) 748-SIOO                           John Joseph MoakleyUnitedSlates Courthouse
                                                         I Courthouse Wo)'
                                                         Suite 9200
                                                         Boston, Massachusetts 02210

                                                         March 24,           2016




William H. Connolly, Esq.
Law Offices of William H.                     Connolly
20 Park Plaza,                   Suite 1000
Boston MA           02210


          Re:       United States v.           Merhawi Berhe;
                    Cr.      No.     15-10043-WGY


Dear Mr.          Connolly:

      The United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts
 {the "U.S. Attorney") and your client, Merhawi Berhe
 ("Defendant"), agree as follows with respect to the above-
referenced case:


            1.       Change of Plea

     At the earliest practicable date. Defendant shall plead
guilty to Count One of the above •referenced Indictment, charging
him with Possession of a                      Firearm with an Obliterated Serial
Number,          in violation of 18 U.S.C , § 922(k).                         Defendant expressly
and unequivocally admits that he committed the crime charged in
Count One of the Indictment, did so knowingly, and is in fact
guilty of that offense.

            2.       Penalties


      Defendant faces the following maximum penalties on Count
 One of the Indictment:  a maximum term of imprisonment of 5
 years; a fine of up to $250,000; a term of supervised release of
 3 years; a $100 special assessment; and forfeiture to the extent
 charged in the Indictment,
                                                                                                         rev. 11/11/15
      Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 2 of 10



      Defendant also recognizes that pleading guilty may have
consequences with respect to Defendant's immigration status if
Defendant is not a          citizen of the United States.      Under federal
law, a broad range of crimes are removable offenses, including
the offense to which Defendant is pleading guilty.  Removal and
other immigration consequences are the subject of a separate
proceeding, however, and Defendant understands that no one,
including defense counsel and the District Court, can predict to
a certainty the effect of this conviction on Defendant's
immigration status. Defendant nevertheless affirms his decision
to plead guilty regardless of any immigration consequences that
this plea may entail, even if the consequence is Defendant's
automatic removal from the United States.

      3.     Sentencing Guidelines

      The   sentence        to be   imposed upon Defendant is within the
discretion       of   the    District   Court    ("Court"),   subject    to   the
statutory maximum penalties set forth above and the provisions
of   the Sentencing Reform Act,           and the advisory United States
Sentencing Guidelines ("USSG" or "Guidelines").                While the Court
may impose a sentence up to and including the statutory maximum
term of imprisonment and statutory maximum fine, it must consult
and take into account the USSG and the other factors set forth
in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) in imposing a sentence.

     The parties agree that Defendant's total offense level
under the USSG (prior to any adjustment for acceptance of
responsibility) is calculated as follows:

             •    in accordance      with USSG    §   2K2.1(a)(7),   Defendant's
                 base offense level is 12.

      If Defendant contends that there is a basis for departure
from, or a sentence outside, the otherwise applicable Guidelines
sentencing range based on Defendant's medical, mental, and/or
emotional condition, or otherwise intends to rely on any such
condition at sentencing. Defendant will, forthwith upon request,
execute all releases and other documentation necessary to permit
the U.S. Attorney and her experts (including Bureau of Prisons
medical personnel) to obtain access to Defendant's medical,
psychiatric, and psychotherapeutic records and will also provide
to the U.S. Attorney forthwith copies of any such records
already in Defendant's possession.              In addition. Defendant will
authorize Defendant's care providers to discuss Defendant's
condition with the U.S. Attorney and her agents (including
      Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 3 of 10



Bureau of Prisons medical personnel), as well as experts
retained by the U.S. Attorney.          Defendant also agrees to submit
to examinations and interviews with experts retained by and
chosen by the U.S. Attorney (including Bureau of Prisons medical
personnel).

     The U.S. Attorney reserves the right to oppose Defendant's
argument(s) for a departure from, or a sentence outside, the
USSG under the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C.          § 3553(a).

     Based on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal
responsibility for the offense of conviction in this case, and
information known to the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S.
Attorney agrees to recommend that the Court reduce by two levels
Defendant's adjusted offense level under USSG § 3E1.1.

     The U.S.     Attorney reserves       the   right not to recommend a
reduction under USSG § 3E1,1 if, at any time between Defendant's
execution of this Plea Agreement and sentencing. Defendant:

     (a)    Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the plea;

     (b)    Fails to truthfully admit Defendant's conduct in the
            offense of conviction;

     (c)    Falsely      denies,   or    frivolously   contests,     relevant
            conduct for which Defendant is accountable under USSG
            §   1B1.3;


     (d)    Fails        to   provide     truthful     information      about
            Defendant's financial status;


      (e)   Gives false or misleading testimony in any proceeding
            relating to the criminal conduct charged in this case
            and any relevant conduct for which Defendant is
            accountable under USSG § IBl.3;

      (f)   Engages in acts that form a basis for finding that
            Defendant has obstructed or impeded the administration
            of justice under USSG § 3C1.1;

      (g)     Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates any
              condition of release;


      (h)     Commits a crime;
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 4 of 10



     (i)   Transfers any asset protected under any provision of
           this Plea Agreement; or

     (j)   Attempts to withdraw Defendant's guilty plea.

     Defendant understands and acknowledges that Defendant may
not withdraw his plea of guilty if, for any of the reasons
listed above, the U.S. Attorney does not recommend that
Defendant receive a reduction in offense level for acceptance of
responsibility.    Defendant also understands and acknowledges
that, in addition to declining to recommend an acceptance-of-
responsibility adjustment, the U.S. Attorney may seek an upward
adjustment pursuant to USSG § 3C1.1 if Defendant obstructs
justice after the date of this Plea Agreement.

     Nothing in this Plea Agreement affects the U.S. Attorney's
obligation to provide the Court and the U.S. Probation Office
with accurate and complete information regarding this case.

     4.    Sentence Recommendation

     The   U.S.    Attorney   agrees   to   recommend    the   following
sentence before the Court:

           (a)    incarceration at the low end of the Guidelines
                  sentencing range as calculated by the Court at
                  sentencing, excluding departures;

           (b)    a fine within the Guidelines sentencing range as
                  calculated by the Court at sentencing, excluding
                  departures, unless the Court finds that Defendant
                  is not able and, even with the use of a
                  reasonable installment schedule, is not likely to
                  become able to pay a fine;

            (c)   36 months of supervised release;

            (d)   a mandatory special assessment of $100, which
                  Defendant must pay to the Clerk of the Court on
                  or before the date of sentencing (unless
                  Defendant establishes to the Court's satisfaction
                  that Defendant is unable to do so); and

            (e)   forfeiture as set forth herein.
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 5 of 10



    Defendant agrees to provide the U.S. Attorney expert
reports, motions, memoranda of law and documentation of any kind
on which Defendant intends to rely at sentencing not later than
7 days before sentencing. Any basis for sentencing as to which
Defendant has not provided the U.S. Attorney all such items at
least 7 days before sentencing shall be deemed waived.

     5.   Waiver of Rights to Appeal and to Bring Future
          Challenge

          (a)   Defendant has conferred with his attorney and
                understands that he has the right to challenge
                both his conviction and his sentence {including
                any orders relating to supervised release, fines,
                forfeiture,   and restitution)   on direct appeal.
                Defendant also understands that,      in some
                circumstances. Defendant may be able to argue in
                a future proceeding (collateral or otherwise) ,
                such as pursuant to a motion under 28 U.S.C.
                § 2255, 28 U.S.C. § 2241, or 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c),
                that Defendant's conviction should be set aside
                or Defendant's sentence (including any orders
                relating to supervised release, fines,
                forfeiture, and restitution) should be set aside
                or reduced.


          (b)   Defendant waives any right to challenge
                Defendant's conviction on direct appeal or in a
                future proceeding (collateral or otherwise).

          (c)   Defendant agrees not to file a direct appeal or
                challenge in a future proceeding (collateral or
                otherwise) any sentence of imprisonment of twelve
                months or less or any orders relating to
                supervised release, fines, forfeiture, and
                restitution. This provision is binding even if
                the Court's Guidelines analysis is different from
                that set forth in this Plea Agreement.

          (d)   The U.S. Attorney likewise agrees that,
                regardless of the analysis employed by the Court,
                the U.S. Attorney will not appeal any
                imprisonment sentence of six months or more.
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 6 of 10



           (e)   Regardless of the previous sub-paragraphs,
                 Defendant reserves the right to claim that:          (i)
                 Defendant's lawyer rendered ineffective
                 assistance of counsel under Strickland v.
                 Washington; or (ii) the prosecutor in this case
                 engaged in misconduct that entitles Defendant to
                 relief from Defendant's conviction or sentence.


     6 ,   Other Post-Sentence Events


            (a) If, despite the waiver provision of siib-paragraph
                5(c), Defendant appeals or challenges in a future
                proceeding (collateral or otherwise) Defendant's
                sentence, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to
                argue the correctness of the sentence imposed by
                the Court (in addition to arguing that any appeal
                or future challenge (collateral or otherwise) is
                 waived as a result of the waiver in sub-paragraph
                 5(c) ) .

           (b)   If, despite the waiver provision of sub-paragraph
                 5(c), Defendant seeks re-sentencing. Defendant
                 agrees not to seek to be re-sentenced with the
                 benefit of any change to the Criminal History
                 Category that the Court calculated at the time of
                 Defendant's original sentencing, except to the
                 extent that Defendant has been found actually
                 factually innocent of a prior crime.

           (c)   In the event of a re-sentencing following an
                 appeal from or future challenge (collateral or
                 otherwise)   to Defendant's sentence, the U.S.
                 Attorney reserves the right to seek a departure
                 from and a sentence outside the USSG if, and to
                 the extent, necessary to reinstate the sentence
                 the U.S. Attorney advocated at Defendant's
                 initial sentencing pursuant to this Plea
                 Agreement.

     7.    Court Not Bound by Plea Agreement

     The parties' sentencing recommendations and their
respective calculations under the USSG are not binding upon the
U.S. Probation Office or the Court.      Within the maximum sentence
Defendant faces under the applicable law, the sentence to be
imposed is within the sole discretion of the Court.         Defendant's
        Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 7 of 10



plea will be tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c) (1) (B) .
Defendant may not withdraw his plea of guilty regardless of what
sentence is imposed, or because the U.S. Probation Office or the
Court declines to follow the parties' USSG calculations or
recommendations.      Should the Court decline to follow the U.S.
Attorney's USSG calculations or recommendations, the U.S.
Attorney reserves the right to defend the Court's calculations
and sentence in any direct appeal or future challenge
(collateral or otherwise).

        8.   Forfeiture


        Defendant understands    that   the Court will,    upon acceptance
of Defendant's guilty plea, enter an order of forfeiture as part
of Defendant's sentence, and that the order of forfeiture may
include assets directly traceable to Defendant's offense, assets
used to facilitate Defendant's offense, substitute assets and/or
a money judgment equal to the value of the property derived
from,    or otherwise involved in,      the offense.

     The assets to be forfeited specifically include, without
limitation, all firearms and ammunition involved in the
commission of the offense.        Defendant admits that these assets
are subject to forfeiture on the grounds that they were involved
in Defendant's offense.       Defendant agrees to consent to the
entry of orders of forfeiture for such property and waives the
requirements of Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 11(b) (1) (J) ,
32.2, and 43(a) regarding notice of the forfeiture in the
charging instrument, advice regarding the forfeiture at the
change-of-plea hearing, announcement of the forfeiture at
sentencing, and incorporation of the forfeiture in the judgment.
Defendant understands and agrees that forfeiture shall not
satisfy or affect any fine, lien, penalty, restitution, cost of
imprisonment, tax liability or any other debt owed to the United
States.


     Defendant agrees to assist fully in the forfeiture of the
foregoing assets. Defendant agrees to promptly take all steps
necessary to pass clear title to the forfeited assets to the
United States, including but not limited to executing any and
all documents necessary to transfer such title, assisting in
bringing within the jurisdiction of the United States any assets
located outside of the United States, and taking all steps
necessary to ensure that assets subject to forfeiture are not
sold, disbursed, wasted, hidden or otherwise made unavailable
for forfeiture.      Defendant further agrees (a) not to assist any
      Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 8 of 10



third party in asserting a claim to the forfeited assets in an
ancillary proceeding, and (b) to testify truthfully in any such
proceeding.

     Defendant also agrees to waive all constitutional, legal,
and equitable challenges (including direct appeal, habeas
corpus, or any other means) to any forfeiture carried out in
accordance with this Plea Agreement.       Defendant agrees not to
challenge or seek review of any civil or administrative
forfeiture of any property subject to forfeiture under this Plea
Agreement, and will not assist any third party with regard to
such challenge or review.

      9.    Civil Liability

     By entering into this Plea Agreement, the U.S. Attorney
does not compromise any civil liability, including but not
limited to any tax liability. Defendant may have incurred or may
incur as a result of Defendant's conduct and plea of guilty to
the charges specified in Paragraph 1 of this Plea Agreement.

      10.   Rejection of Plea by Court

      Should Defendant's guilty plea not be accepted by the Court
for   whatever reason,   or later be withdrawn on Defendant's
motion, this Plea Agreement shall be null and void at the option
of the U.S. Attorney.

      11.   Breach of Plea Agreement


     If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed
to comply with any provision of this Plea Agreement, has
violated any condition of Defendant's pretrial release, or has
committed any crime following Defendant's execution of this Plea
Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may, at her sole option, be
released from her commitments under this Plea Agreement in their
entirety by notifying Defendant, through counsel or otherwise,
in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also pursue all remedies
available to her under the law, regardless whether she elects to
be released from her commitments under this Plea Agreement.
Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and all charges that
have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this Plea
Agreement. Defendant recognizes that his breach of any
obligation under this Plea Agreement shall not give rise to
grounds for withdrawal of Defendant's guilty plea, but will give
the U.S. Attorney the right to use against Defendant before any
                                     8
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 9 of 10



grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes,
any statements made by Defendant and any information, materials,
documents or objects provided by Defendant to the government,
without any limitation, regardless of any prior agreements or
understandings, written or oral, to the contrary.  In this
regard. Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges that
Defendant might otherwise have based upon any statute of
limitations, the constitutional protection against pre-
indictment delay, or the Speedy Trial Act.

     12.    Who Is Bound By Plea Agreement

     This Plea Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusetts,      and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal,
state or local prosecutive authorities.

     13.    Complete Plea Agreement

     This Plea Agreement can be modified or supplemented only in
a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the record in
court.


     If    this   letter   accurately    reflects     the   agreement   between
the U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Plea Agreement below.  Please also sign below
as Witness.       Return the original of       this     letter    to Assistant
U.S. Attorney Peter K. Levitt.

                                          Very truly yours,

                                          CARMEN M.     ORTIZ
                                          United States Attorney

                                   By:    CYNTHIA A. YOUNG
                                          Chief, Criminal Division



                                           PETER K.    LEVITT
                                          Chief,
                                          Organized Crime & Gang Unit
                                          Assistant U.S.        Attorney
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 30 Filed 03/24/16 Page 10 of 10




                  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF       PLEA AGREEMENT


     I have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it
with my attorney.  I hereby acknowledge that it fully sets forth
my agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for the
District of Massachusetts.     I   further state that no additional
promises or representations have been made to me by any official
of the United States in connection with this matter,              and that I
have received no prior offers to resolve this case.  I
understand the crime to which I have agreed to plead guilty, the
maximum penalties for that offense and the Sentencing Guideline
penalties potentially applicable to it. I am satisfied with the
legal representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had
sufficient time to meet and discuss my case.          We have discussed
the charge against me, possible defenses I might have, the terms
of this Plea Agreement and whether I should go to trial. I am
entering into this Plea Agreement freely, voluntarily, and
knowingly because I am guilty of the offense to which I am
pleading guilty, and I believe this Plea Agreement is in my best
interest.




                                   MERHAWI    BERHE
                                   Defendant


                                   Date:     March     ,   2016


     I certify that Merhawi Berhe has read this Plea Agreement
and that we have discussed its meaning.          I believe he
understands the Plea Agreement and is entering into the Plea
Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly.          I also certify
that the U.S. Attorney has not extenj^ed any otheoj offers to
resolve   this matter.




                                   WILLTAM      XGefNNOLLY
                                   Attorney for Defendai

                                   Date:     March           2016




                                     10
