       Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 37 Filed 07/22/16 Page 1 of 5



                          UNITED	STATES	DISTRICT	COURT	
                           DISTRICT	OF	MASSACHUSETTS	
                                        	
 	
 UNITED	STATES	       	       	      	      )	      	
 	    	     	         	       	      	      )	
 v.	  	     	         	       	      	      )	      	      Crim.	No.	15-10043-WGY	 	
 	    	     	         	       	      	      )	
 MERHAWI	BERHE	       	       	      	      )	
 	    	

              Defendant	Merhawi	Berhe’s	Sentencing	Memorandum	

        Now	comes	the	Defendant,	Merhawi	Berhe,	by	and	through	undersigned	

 counsel,	pursuant	to	18	U.S.C.	§3553(a)	and	the	U.S.	Sentencing	Guidelines,	and	

 hereby	moves	the	Court	to	depart	and/or	deviate	from	the	applicable	Guideline	

 Sentencing	Range	of	6-12	months,	as	calculated	by	Probation,	and	impose	a	

 sentence	of	seven	days’	imprisonment	(deemed	served)	with	a	three-year	period	of	

 supervise	release	in	this	matter	(hereinafter	referred	to	as	a	probationary	sentence,	

 though	technically	not	a	sentence	of	probation).		This	recommended	sentence	

 represents	only	a	small	deviation	from	the	GSR,	accords	with	the	sentencing	options	

 set	forth	at	U.S.S.G.	§5C1.1,	and	achieves	the	purposes	of	18	U.S.C.	§3553.		Moreover,	

 the	recommend	sentence	is	just	and	fair	under	the	circumstances	of	this	case.			

 1.	    Merhawi	Berhe	

		      Though	the	Court	is	familiar	with	the	personal	history	of	Merhawi	Berhe	

 through	the	PSR	and	letters	of	support	submitted	by	Merhawi’s	family,	friends,	and	

 church,	it	bears	repeating	several	significant	facts	about	Merhawi.		First	and	

 foremost,	Merhawi	comes	from	a	loving	and	supportive	family.		His	parents,	

 Tesfamariam	Berhe	and	Ghennet	Okubaghbriel,	are	hard-working,	well-respected	

 members	of	their	Eritrean	community	and	church.		Merhawi	has	lived	with	his	


 	                                          1	
        Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 37 Filed 07/22/16 Page 2 of 5



 parents	during	the	course	of	his	pretrial	supervision	and	he	will	continue	to	live	

 with	his	parents	until	his	federal	supervision	is	terminated.		Second,	Merhawi	has	an	

 extended	network	of	family,	friends,	and	church	leaders,	all	of	whom	hold	Merhawi	

 in	high	regard	and	will	continue	to	provide	support	to	Merhawi	in	his	rehabilitation.		

 Third,	over	the	course	of	his	fifteen-month	supervision	in	this	case,	Merhawi	has	

 demonstrated	that	he	is	capable	of	living	a	productive	and	law-abiding	life.		Fourth,	

 as	set	forth	in	the	letters	of	support,	Merhawi	is	a	humble	and	respectful	young	man.		

 Finally,	many	of	the	destructive	behaviors	that	ultimately	led	to	his	commission	of	

 the	instant	offense	can	be	traced	to	his	ADHD	and	impairments	in	several	areas	

 necessary	for	academic	and	social	success.		PSR	¶55.		Due	to	his	diagnosed	

 impairments,	Merhawi	in	the	past	has	struggled	emotionally	and	socially	and	was	

 unable	to	achieve	any	level	of	success	in	a	traditional	school.		These	psychological	

 impairments	and	accompanying	academic	and	social	difficulties	resulted	in	terribly	

 low	self	esteem,	causing	Merhawi	to	drop	out	of	school,	and	ultimately	leading	

 Merhawi	to	make	destructive	choices	in	his	life.	

	 2.	    Merhawi’s	Rehabilitation	

		       Merhawi	was	arrested	for	the	instant	offense	on	March	11,	2015.		On	March	

 17,	2015,	Merhawi	was	released	on	strict	conditions.		Merhawi’s	indictment,	arrest,	

 and	plea	in	this	case	have	generated	media	coverage	due	to	the	connection	to	the	

 Marathon	Bombing	case.		Merhawi’s	family,	friends,	church,	and	community	are	well	

 aware	of	the	charges	against	him	and	have	supported	Merhawi	throughout	his	case.		

 Over	the	course	of	the	last	fifteen	and	a	half	months,	Merhawi	has	worked	hard	to	

 reverse	the	direction	of	his	life	by	enrolling	in	a	GED	program,	obtaining	his	first	



 	                                          2	
      Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 37 Filed 07/22/16 Page 3 of 5



 paying	job,	and	abiding	by	all	of	the	terms	of	his	release.		Merhawi	has	not	missed	a	

 single	visit	with	probation,	has	not	once	violated	his	curfew,	and	has	treated	his	

 probation	officer	and	the	entire	criminal	process	with	respect.		He	is	indeed	a	young	

 man	capable	of	full	rehabilitation.	

3.	     The	Sentence	

        Neither	the	Sentencing	Guidelines	nor	the	sentencing	factors	of	§3553	

 command	a	jail	sentence	in	this	case,	and	indeed	the	goal	of	achieving	a	sentence	

 that	is	fair	and	necessary	under	the	circumstances	of	this	case	is	satisfied	by	a	

 probationary	sentence.		A	probationary	sentence	will	serve	as	both	a	severe	

 continuing	sanction	against	Merhawi	for	his	criminal	conduct	and	at	the	same	time	

 will	enable	Merhawi	to	continue	his	successful	rehabilitation	that	began	shortly	

 after	his	arrest	in	this	matter.		All	told,	with	the	recommended	sentence,	Merhawi	

 will	have	spent	four	years	and	three	month	sunder	the	supervision	of	this	Court.		

 	      It	is	important	to	note	that	in	seeking	a	probationary	sentence,	Merhawi	

 Berhe	is	not	attempting	to	minimize	the	seriousness	of	his	criminal	offense.		While	

 Merhawi	had	no	reason	to	believe	the	firearm	he	passed	to	another	individual	

 would	be	used	in	connection	with	another	violent	criminal	offense,	Merhawi	Berhe	

 recognizes	the	seriousness	of	his	conduct	in	placing	a	firearm	on	the	streets	of	

 Cambridge.		Notwithstanding	the	seriousness	of	the	offense,	the	defendant	asserts	

 that	sending	him	to	jail	would	unravel	all	the	work	he	has	done	over	the	past	fifteen	

 months	to	begin	slowly	building	a	resume	that	will	enable	him	to	become	a	

 productive	member	of	his	community.		Incarceration	would	disrupt	Merhawi’s	




 	                                          3	
     Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 37 Filed 07/22/16 Page 4 of 5



schooling,	terminate	his	current	employment,	and	reunite	him	with	the	types	of	

individuals	who	negatively	influenced	Merhawi	as	a	young	teenager.			

	      Merhawi	has	demonstrated	over	the	past	fifteen	months	that	he	is	serious	

about	leading	a	productive	and	law-abiding	life.		A	term	of	imprisonment	is	simply	

not	necessary	to	promote	respect	for	the	law	and	deter	any	future	criminal	conduct	

by	Merhawi	or	others.		The	federal	prosecution,	accompanying	publicity,	guilty	plea,	

and	continued	supervision	of	the	Court	in	this	matter	are	more	than	adequate	to	

achieve	the	goals	of	sentencing,	and	therefore	the	interests	of	society	are	best	

served	by	imposing	a	substantial	period	of	probation	to	ensure	Merhawi’s	continued	

rehabilitation	and	positive	contributions	to	society.					

	      Given	all	of	the	foregoing,	Merhawi	Berhe	respectfully	submits	that	a	

sentence	of	probation,	with	appropriate	conditions,	is	a	fair	and	just	sentence,	and	

certainly	“sufficient	but	not	more	than	necessary”	to	meet	the	goals	of	§3553(a).			

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	

                                             	



	                                           4	
        Case 1:15-cr-10043-WGY Document 37 Filed 07/22/16 Page 5 of 5



                                         Conclusion	

         For	all	of	the	foregoing	reasons,	as	well	as	additional	grounds	and	reasons	to	

be	articulated	to	the	Court	at	sentencing,	the	defendant	respectfully	requests	a	

sentence	of	seven-days’	imprisonment,	followed	by	three	years’	supervised	release,	

and	whatever	conditions	the	Court	believes	necessary.	

	

                                                       Respectfully	Submitted,	

    	    	      	      	      	      	        	        Merhawi	Berhe,	
    	    	      	      	      	      	        	        By	His	Attorney	
    	
    	
	        	      	      	      	      	        	        /s/	William	H.	Connolly	
                                                       William	H.	Connolly		
                                                       BBO	#	634501	
                                                       20	Park	Plaza,	Suite	1000	
                                                       Boston,	MA	02116	
                                                       617-542-0200	
                                                       	
                                             	
                                  Certificate	of	Service	
                                             	
I	hereby	certify	that	this	document	filed	through	the	CM/ECF	system	will	be	sent	
electronically	to	the	registered	participants	as	identified	on	the	NEF	(NEF)	and	
paper	copies	will	be	sent	to	those	indicated	as	non	registered	participants	on	July	
22,	2016.	
	
	
	      	       	       	      	      	       	       /s/	William	H.	Connolly	
	

	

	




	                                            5	
