   Case 3:02-cr-30043-MAP   Document 210   Filed 04/25/2006   Page 1 of 2



                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA )
                         )
          v.             )       Criminal No. 02-30043-MAP
                         )
MICHAEL QUICKEL,         )
          Defendant.     )

                   Substantial Assistance Motion

     The United States of America, by Michael J. Sullivan, United

States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts, moves pursuant

to U.S.S.G. § 5K1.1 to authorize the Court to depart from the

otherwise applicable sentencing guideline range based on Michael

Quickel’s substantial assistance to the government in the

investigation and prosecution of others.

                  Nature and Extent of Cooperation

     Quickel cooperated almost immediately after he was arrested.

He was fully debriefed and agreed to testify against his co-

defendants.   His cooperation was somewhat instrumental in

inducing the guilty pleas of three co-defendants because he would

have told the story of obtaining 17 of the firearms, thereby

making the government’s case more complete.

     Ivan Teleguz went to trial and Quickel testified that he

purchased 17 of the firearms for Teleguz.        Quickel was very

cooperative during his trial preparation and sincere in his

testimony, which was instrumental in convicting Teleguz.

     Quickel took a substantial risk in testifying against

Teleguz, who is very dangerous.      During his federal trial in

December, 2006, Teleguz was awaiting trial in Virginia for the
   Case 3:02-cr-30043-MAP   Document 210   Filed 04/25/2006   Page 2 of 2



capital crime of hiring a hit man who brutally murdered Teleguz’s

former girlfriend.    Teleguz did not want to pay child support for

the child he had with the girlfriend.      After Teleguz’s federal

trial, he was convicted of the capital crime and the jury has

recommended that he be executed.

                             Recommendation

     The government recommends that the Court sentence Quickel to

fourteen months in prison, which is a forty per cent downward

departure from the low end of the sentencing guideline range.

                                   Respectfully submitted,

                                   MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN
                                   United States Attorney


                             by:   /s/ Kevin O’Regan
                                   Kevin O’Regan
                                   Assistant U.S. Attorney

                            Date: April 25, 2006




                        Certificate of Service

                             April 25, 2006

     I certify that I caused the foregoing document to be faxed
to counsel for the defendant, Richard Maggi, Esq.



                                   /s/ Kevin O’Regan
                                   Kevin O'Regan
                                   Assistant U.S. Attorney




                                     2
