Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 1 of 11

U.S. Department of Justice

 

Michael J. Sullivan
United Sl‘ates Attorney
fhshictqfddhssachusens

 

Mairr Recep!!on: (41_?} 785-0235 Fedem! Bui[rfz'ng and Cour£house
Facsc`mz`[c’: (41'5) 785-0394 1550 Mm`.': Stree£, Room 310
Sprfngfr`c’[d, Mrrssachuse!ts 01103

July lS, 2005

Richard J. Maggi, Esg.
73 Chestnut Street
Springfield, MA 01103

Re: United States v. Michael Quickel
Criminal No. 02-30043#MAP

Dear Mr. Maggi:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United
States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts ("the U.S.
Attorney") and your client, Michael Quickel ("Defendant"), in the
above-captioned case. The Agreement is as follows:

l. Change of Plea

At the earliest practicable date Defendant shall plead
guilty to the count in which he is named in the above-captioned
Second Superseding lndictment ("lndictment"). Defendant
expressly and unequivocally admits that he in fact knowingly,
intentionally and willfully committed the crime charged in Count
One of the lndictment, and is in fact guilty of that offense.

2. Penalties

Defendant faces the following maximum penalties on Count One
of the lndictment:

- five years incarceration;
~ $250,000 fine;
- 7 three years supervised release; and

- $lOO special assessment.

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 2 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July 18, 2005
Page 2

3. Sentencing Guidelines

The sentence to be imposed upon Defendant is within the
discretion of the sentencing Court, subject to the statutory
maximum penalties set forth above, and the provisions of the
Sentencing Reform Act and the United States Sentencing Guidelines
promulgated thereunder, as modified by United States v. Booker
and United States v. Fanfan, 125 S.Ct. 738, 2005 WL 50l08
(January 12, 2005). ln imposing the sentence, the Court must
consult and take into account the United States Sentencing
Guidelines, along with the other factors set forth in 18 U.S.C.
§3553(a).

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that there is no basis
for a departure from the sentencing range established by the
United States Sentencing Guidelines except as explicitly reserved
below. Accordingly, neither the U.S. Attorney nor Defendant will
seek a departure on any ground from the Sentencing Guidelines,
except under the conditions explicitly set forth below.

The U.S. Attorney expressly reserves the right to seek an
upward departure pursuant to U.S.S.G. §4Al.3 should any of
Defendant’s prior state convictions be vacated or Defendant’s
Criminal History Category otherwise change after his indictment
in this case. Thus, for example, the government may contend that
an upward departure under §4Al.3 is appropriate if a state-court
conviction that existed at the time of Defendant's indictment is
vacated and that vacation alters Defendant's Criminal History
Category.

Based on Defendant's prompt acceptance of personal
responsibility for the offense(s) of conviction in this case, and
information known to the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S.
Attorney agrees to recommend that the Court reduce by three
levels Defendant's Adjusted Offense Level under U.S.S.G. § 3El.l.

The U.S. Attorney specifically reserves the right not to
recommend a reduction under U.S.S.G. § 3El.l if, at any time
between his execution of this Agreement and sentencing Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the
plea;

(b) Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the
offenses of conviction;

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 3 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July 18, 2005
Page 3

(c} Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under
U.S.S.G. § lBl.3;

(d} Fails to provide truthful information about his
financial status;

(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any
proceeding relating to the criminal conduct
charged in this case and any relevant conduct for
which Defendant is accountable under U.S.S.G. §
lBl.3;

(f) Engages in acts which form a basis for finding
that Defendant has obstructed or impeded the
administration of justice under U.S.S.G. § 3Cl.l;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates
any condition of release;

(h) Commits a crime;

(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision
of this Agreement; and/or

(j) Attempts to withdraw his guilty plea.

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty if, for any of the reasons listed above, the U.S.
Attorney does not recommend that he receive a reduction in
Offense Level for acceptance of responsibility.

Defendant expressly understands that, in addition to
declining to recommend an acceptance-of-responsibility
adjustment, the Government may seek an upward adjustment pursuant
to U.S.S.G. § 3Cl.l if Defendant obstructs justice after date of
this Agreement.

4. Sentence Recommendation
fn the event the U.S. Attorney does not file a motion under

U.S.S.G. §BKl.l, the U.S. Attorney agrees to recommend the
following sentence before the District Court:

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 4 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esg.
July lS, 2005

Page 4
(a) Incarceration or other confinement within the
sentencing guideline range determined by the
Court;

(b) Fine within the applicable sentencing guideline
range determined by the Court unless the court
finds that Defendant is not able and, even with
the use of a reasonable installment schedule, is
not likely to become able to pay a fine;

(c) $100 mandatory special assessment; and

(d} Supervised release within the applicable
sentencing guideline range established by the
Court.

Defendant agrees that he will provide to the U.S. Attorney
expert reports, motions, memoranda of law and documentation of
any kind on which he intends to rely at sentencing not later than
twenty-one days before sentencing. Any basis for sentencing with
respect to which all expert reports, motions, memoranda of law
and documentation have not been provided to the U.S. Attorney at
least twenty-one days before sentencing shall be deemed waived.

ln the event of an appeal from, or collateral challenge to,
Defendant’s sentence, the U.S. Attorney reserves his right to
argue the correctness of Defendant's sentence and the manner in
which the District Court determines it.

5. Pavment of Mandatorv Special Assessment

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to
the Clerk of the Court on or before the date of sentencing,
unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court
that Defendant is financially unable to do so.

6. Waiver of Rights to Appeal and to Bring Collateral
Challenge

Defendant is aware that he has the right to challenge his
sentence and guilty plea on direct appeal. Defendant is also
aware that he may, in some circumstances, be able to argue that
his plea should be set aside, or his sentence set aside or
reduced, in a collateral challenge (such as pursuant to a motion
under 28 U.S.C. § 2255).

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 5 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esg.
July 18, 2005
Page 5

ln consideration of the concessions made by the U.S.
Attorney in this Agreement, Defendant knowingly and voluntarily
waives his right to appeal or collaterally challenge:

(l) Defendant’s guilty plea and any other aspect of
Defendant’s conviction, including, but not limited
to, any rulings on pretrial suppression motions or
any other pretrial dispositions of motions and
issues; and

(2) The imposition by the District Court of a sentence
which does not exceed that being recommended by
the U.S. Attorney pursuant to this agreement.

ln consideration of the concessions made by the U.S.
Attorney in this Agreement, Defendant agrees not to seek to be
sentenced or resentenced with the benefit of any successful
collateral challenge of any counseled criminal conviction that
exists as of the date of this Agreement.

Defendant's waiver of rights to appeal and to bring
collateral challenges shall not apply to appeals or challenges
based on new legal principles in First Circuit or Supreme Court
cases decided after the date of this Agreement which are held by
the First Circuit or Supreme Court to have retroactive effect.

Defendant's waiver also shall not extend to an appeal or
collateral challenge based solely on the argument that the
District Court misunderstood the scope of its authority to depart
from the applicable Sentencing Guidelines range, where the
District Court states on the record at sentencing both its desire
to depart and the basis on which it would depart if it had the
legal authority to do so.

This Agreement does not affect the rights or obligations of
the United States as set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3742{b), and the
U.S. Attorney therefore retains his appeal rights.

7. Cooperation

a. Terms of Cooberation

Defendant agrees to cooperate fully with law enforcement
agents and government attorneys. He must provide complete and
truthful information to all law enforcement personnel. if his
testimony is reguested, he must testify truthfully and completely

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 6 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July 18, 2005
Page 6

before any grand jury, and at any hearing and trial. Defendant
must answer all questions put to him by any law enforcement
agents or government attorneys and must not withhold any
information. He must not attempt to protect any person or entity
through false information or omission, or to implicate falsely
any person or entity. Upon request, he must furnish all
documents, objects and other evidence in his possession, custody
or control that are relevant to the government's inquiries.

Defendant understands that he has a right to have counsel
present when communicating with representatives of the government
concerning the criminal conduct with which he has been charged.
To facilitate his cooperation, Defendant hereby knowingly and
voluntarily waives this right with respect to all debriefings by
law enforcement agents and government attorneys and all
appearances to testify. This waiver may be revoked at any time
by a specific request by Defendant or his counsel without
otherwise affecting the terms or enforceability of this
Agreement.

To enable the Court to have the benefit of all relevant
sentencing information, Defendant waives any rights he may have
to prompt sentencing and will join in any requests by the U.S.
Attorney that sentencing be postponed until Defendant's
cooperation is complete. Defendant understands that the date of
Defendant's sentencing is within the sole discretion of the Court
and that this Agreement may require Defendant's cooperation to
continue even after Defendant has been sentenced. Defendant's
failure to continue to cooperate pursuant to the terms of this
Agreement after sentence is imposed shall constitute a breach of
this Agreement by Defendant.

b. Substantial Assistance Motion

ln the event that Defendant provides substantial assistance
in the investigation or prosecution of another person who has
committed a criminal offense, the U.S. Attorney agrees that, at
or before the time of sentencing, the U.S. Attorney will make a
motion under U.S.S.G. § 5Kl.l, so that the sentencing court may
impose a sentence below that which otherwise would be required
under the relevant statutes.

The determination whether Defendant has provided substantial
assistance rests solely in the discretion of the U.S. Attorney
and is not subject to appeal or review. The U.S. Attorney
expressly reserves the right to decline to file a motion pursuant

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 7 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July lS, 2005
Page l

to U.S.S.G.-§ 5Kl.l if Defendant violates any condition of his
pretrial release, violates any of the requirements of honesty and
candor detailed in paragraph F{a) above, or engages in any
criminal conduct after the date he signs this Agreement.
Defendant may not withdraw his plea if the U.S. Attorney
determines that Defendant has not rendered substantial
assistance, or if the Court refuses to grant the U.S. Attorney’s
motion for a downward departure.

c. Sentence Recommendation with Substantial
Assistance

If Defendant provides substantial assistance, subject to all
the provisions of paragraphs T(a) and (b) above, the U.S.
Attorney will advise the sentencing judge of the full nature,
extent and value of the assistance provided by Defendant. The
U.S. Attorney reserves the right to recommend a particular
sentence or sentencing range, or to make no recommendation at
Defendant‘s sentencing.

d. Letter lmmunity

In return for Defendant's full and truthful cooperation, the
U.S. Attorney agrees not to use any information provided by
Defendant pursuant to this Agreement or pursuant to the proffer
letter dated November 8, 2004 (or any information directly or
indirectly derived therefrom) against Defendant in any criminal
case except in a prosecution (l) for perjury or obstruction of
justice, or for making a false statement after the date of this
Agreement; or (2) for an act of physical violence against the
person of another, or conspiracy to commit any such act of
violence. The U.S. Attorney reserves the right to respond fully
and completely to all requests for information by the District
Court and U.S. Probation Office in this case. All such
disclosures, however, shall be made subject to the provisions
constraining the use of this information by the District Court
and U.S. Probation Office contained in U.S.S.G. § lBl.S(a) and
the commentary thereto. Notwithstanding the provisions of
U.S.S.G. § lBl.B(b)(5) and the commentary thereto, the U.S.
Attorney agrees to take the.position that at the time of
sentencing information provided by Defendant pursuant to this
Agreement should not be used either in determining where within
the applicable guideline range to sentence Defendant or in
determining whether, or to what extent, a departure from the
Sentencing Guidelines is warranted.

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 8 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July 18, 2005
Page 8

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has breached
this Agreement by making any false, incomplete or misleading
statement, or by providing any false, incomplete or misleading
information to any law enforcement personnel, grand jury or
court, the U.S. Attorney may terminate this Agreement as set
forth below, and may also prosecute Defendant for any and all
offenses that could be charged against him in the District of
Massachusetts, including, but not limited to, false statements
and perjury.

8. Court Not Bound By Agreement

The sentencing recommendations made by the parties and their
respective calculations under the Sentencing Guidelines are not
binding upon the U.S. Probation Office or the sentencing judge.
Within the maximum sentence which Defendant faces under the
applicable law, the sentence to be imposed is within the sole
discretion of the sentencing judge. Defendant's plea will be
tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(B). Defendant may
not withdraw his plea of guilty regardless of what sentence is
imposed. Nor may Defendant withdraw his plea because the U.S.
Probation Office or the sentencing judge declines to follow the
Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations of the
parties. In the event that the sentencing judge declines to
follow the Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations
of the U.S. Attorney, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to
defend the sentencing judge’s calculations and sentence in any
subsequent appeal or collateral challenge.

9. Civil Liability

By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not
compromise any civil liability, including but not limited to any
tax liability, which Defendant may have incurred or may incur as
a result of his conduct and his plea of guilty to the charges
specified in paragraph one of this Agreement.

10. Rejection of Plea By Court

Should Defendant's guilty plea not be accepted by the Court
for whatever reason, or later be withdrawn on motion of
Defendant, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of
the U.S. Attorney.

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 9 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July lB, 2005
Page 9

ll. Breach of Agreement

lf the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to
comply with any provision of this Agreement, has violated any
condition of his pretrial release, or has committed any crime
following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may,
at his sole option, be released from his commitments under this
Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through
counsel or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also
pursue all remedies available to him under the law, irrespective
of whether he elects to be released from his commitments under
this Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may.pursue any and
all charges which have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to
this Agreement. Defendant recognizes that no such breach by him
of an obligation under this Agreement shall give rise to grounds
for withdrawal of his guilty plea. Defendant understands that,
should he breach any provision of this agreement, the U.S.
Attorney will have the right to use against Defendant before any
grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes,
any statements which may be made by him, and any information,
materials, documents or objects which may be provided by him to
the government subsequent to this Agreement, or pursuant to the
proffer agreement dated November 8, 2004 without any limitation.
ln this regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any
charges which he might otherwise have under any statute of
limitations or the Speedy Trial Act.

l2. Who ls Bound Bv Agreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusetts, and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state
or local prosecutive authorities.

13- Complete Agreement

This letter contains the complete and only agreement between
the parties relating to the disposition of this case. No
promises, representations or agreements have been made other than
those set forth in this letter and in the proffer letter dated
November 8, 2004. This Agreement supersedes prior
understandings, if any, of the parties, whether written or oral
with the sole exception of those contained in the proffer letter
dated November 8, 2004. This Agreement can be modified or
supplemented only in a written memorandum signed by the parties
or on the record in court. -

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 10 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July lS, 2005
Page 10

lf this letter accurately reflects the Agreement between the
U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S.
Attorney Kevin O'Regan.

Very truly yours,

MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN
United States Attorney

jaw/ek

Laura J. Kaplan
Chief, Violent & Organized
Crime Section

By:

 

Kevin O'Regan
Assistant U.S. Attorney

Case 3:02-cr-30043-|\/|AP Document 221 Filed 07/18/2005 Page 11 of 11

Letter to Richard J. Maggi, Esq.
July lB, 2005
Page ll

ACKNQWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

l have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it
with my attorney. l hereby acknowledge that it fully sets forth
my agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for the
District of Massachusetts. l further state that no additional
promises or representations have been made to me by any official
of the United States in connection with this matter. l understand
the crimes to which l have agreed to plead guilty, the maximum
penalties for those offenses and Sentencing Guideline penalties
potentially applicable to them. l am satisfied with the legal
representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had
sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed
the charges against me, possible defenses I might have, the terms
of this Plea Agreement and whether l should go to trial. l am
entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly
because l am guilty of the offenses to which l am pleading guilty
and l believe this Agreement is in my best interest-

Michael Quickel
Defendant

Date: 7`/7`,7?§575/_

l certify that Michael Quickel has read this Agreement and
that we have discussed its meaning. l believe he understands the
Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely, voluntarily

and knowingly. - /:::>
ichard J. daggi, Esq-
Attorney for Defendant

Date: 7“/ ?»-& 5'

    
   

 

