Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page1 of 8

U.S. Department of Justice

 

Michael J. Sullivan
United States Attorney
District of Massachusetts

 

Main Recep!ion: (61 7) 74 8-3 1' 00 Jahn Joseph Moakley Uniled States Courrhouse
1 Courthouse Way
Sm`te 9200
Boston, Massachuserts 02210

January qurf ar sound
Charles P. McGinty, Esq.

Federal Public Defenders Office
408 Atlantic Avenue nl 1
BOStOn, MA 02210 ;)~,?.`11~.. l,___

 

Re: United States v. Sean Slater _w~a“dw'yji:»~~m~-
Crim. No. 04-10127-NG D@`*'~""»`"M"~"f Ci"’EY‘-"H

Dear Mr. McGinty:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United States
Attorney for the District of Massachusetts ("the U.S. Attorney") and
your client, Sean Slater ("Defendant"), in the above-captioned case.
The Agreement is as follows:

l. Change of Plea

At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall plead guilty
to Counts One, Two, Four, and Five of the above Indictment.
Defendant expressly and unequivocally admits that he in fact
knowingly, intentionally and willfully committed the crimes charged
in those counts of the Indictment, and is in fact guilty of those
offenses. The U.S. Attorney agrees to dismiss Count Three of the
indictment thirty days after Defendant has been sentenced provided
that Defendant has complied with all the terms of this Agreement.

2, Penalties

Defendant faces the following minimum mandatory and maximum
penalties:

Count l Cons irac - 18 USC 371

l 5 years imprisonment;
0 a fine of $250,000;

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 2 of 8

0 3 years of supervised release; and
0 a $100 mandatory special assessment.

Count 2 (AISOn - 18 USC 844(i))

0 20 years' imprisonment With a mandatory minimum of 5
years' imprisonment;

0 a fine of $250,000;

0 3 years of supervised release; and

0 a $100 mandatory special assessment;

Count 4 Unre istered destructive device - 26 USC 5861 f

10 years’ imprisonment;

a fine of $250,000;

3 years of supervised release; and
a $100 mandatory special assessment

count 5 (ITAR - 18 Usc 1952(a) (3))

20 years’ imprisonment; 'qu#¢!
a fine of $250,000;

3 years of supervised release; and

a $100 mandatory special assessment

3. Sentencing Guidelines

The sentence to be imposed. upon_ Defendant is within the
discretion. of the sentencing court, subject to the statutory
[mandatory minimum] and maximum penalties set forth above, and the
provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act, and the United States
Sentencing Guidelines promulgated thereunder. The Sentencing
Guidelines are advisory, not mandatory and, as a result, the Court
may impose a sentence up to and including the statutory maximum
term of imprisonment and statutory maximum fine. In imposing the
sentence, the Court must consult and take into account the
Sentencing Guidelines, along with the other factors set forth in 18
U.S.C. §3553(a).

The parties agree that pursuant to U.S.S.G. §§ 5G1.1(b),
2Kl.4(a)(2}, 2El.2(a)(2), 2Xl.l(a), 2X1.1(b)(2), and 2K2.l(a)(5),
the guideline sentence in this case is the minimum term of
imprisonment required by statute, i.e., 5 years’ imprisonment
pursuant to 18 USC 844(i).

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that there is no basis
for a departure from the Sentencing Guidelines or for a sentence
outside the Guidelines under the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C.§

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 3 of 8

3553(a). Accordingly, neither the U.S. Attorney nor Defendant will
seek a departure from the Sentencing Guidelines or a sentence
outside the Guidelines, except under the conditions explicitly set
forth below.

The U.S. Attorney expressly reserves the right to seek an
upward departure pursuant to USSG §4A1.3 should any of Defendant's
prior state convictions be vacated or Defendant's Criminal History
Category otherwise change after his indictment in this case. Thus,
for example, the U.S. Attorney may contend that an upward departure
under §4A1.3 is appropriate if a state-court conviction that
existed at the time of Defendant's indictment is vacated and that
vacation alters Defendant's Criminal History Category.

Based on.Defendant’s acceptance of personal responsibility for
the offense(s) of conviction in this case, and information known to
the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S. Attorney agrees to
recommend that the Court reduce by two levels Defendant's Adjusted
Offense Level under USSG §3E1.1.

The U.S. Attorney specifically' reserves the right not to
recommend a reduction under USSG §3E1.1 if, at any time between his
execution of this Agreement and sentencing Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the
plea;

(b) Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the
offenses of conviction;

(c) Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under
USSG §lBl . 3;

(d) Fails to provide truthful information about his
financial status;

(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any
proceeding relating to the criminal conduct charged
in this case and any relevant conduct for which
Defendant is accountable under USSG §1B1.3;

(f) Engages in acts which form a basis for finding that
Defendant has obstructed or impeded the
administration of justice under USSG §3€1.1;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates
any condition of release;

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 4 of 8

(h) Commits a crime;

(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision
of this Agreement; and/or

(j) Attempts to withdraw his guilty plea.

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty if, for any of the reasons listed above, the U.S.
Attorney does not recommend that he receive a reduction in Offense
Level for acceptance of responsibility.

Defendant expressly understands that, in addition.to declining
to recommend an acceptance-of-responsibility adjustment, the U.S.
Attorney may seek an upward adjustment pursuant to USSG §3C1.1 if
Defendant obstructs justice after date of this Agreement.

4. Sentence Recommendation

The parties agree to recommend the following sentence before
the District Court:

(a) Five years’ incarceration;
(b) Mandatory special assessment of $400; and
(f) Three years' supervised release.

Defendant agrees that he will provide to the U.S. Attorney
expert reports, motions, memoranda of law and documentation of any
kind on which he intends to rely at sentencing not later than seven
days before sentencing. Any basis for sentencing with respect to
which all expert reports, motions, memoranda of law and
documentation have not been provided to the U.S. Attorney at least
seven days before sentencing shall be deemed waived.

In the event of an appeal from, or collateral challenge to,
Defendant's sentence, the U.S. Attorney reserves his right to argue
the correctness of Defendant's sentence and the manner in which the
District Court determines it.

5. Payment of Mandatory Special Assessment

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to
the Clerk of the Court on or before the date of sentencing, unless
Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that
Defendant is financially unable to do so.

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 5 of 8

 

6. Waiver of Rights to Appeal and to Bring Collateral
Challenge
a. Defendant has conferred.with.his attorney and.understands

that he has the right to challenge both his conviction and his
sentence on direct appeal. Defendant also understands that he may,
in some circumstances, be able to argue that his conviction and/or
sentence should be set aside or reduced in a collateral challenge,
such as pursuant to a motion under 28 U.S.C. §2255 or 18 U.S.C.
§3582(€).

b. The defendant waives any right he has to challenge his
conviction on direct appeal or in collateral challenge.

c. Defendant agrees that he will not file a direct appeal
nor collaterally challenge any imprisonment sentence of 60 months
or less. This provision is binding even if the Court employs a
Guidelines analysis different from that set forth in this Agreement

d. The U.S. Attorney likewise agrees that, regardless of
the analysis employed by the Court, he will not appeal any
imprisonment sentence of 60 months or more.

e. This Agreement does not affect the rights of the United
States as set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3742(b). Defendant expressly
acknowledges that he understands the U.S. Attorney has retained his
appeal rights.

7. Other Post-sentence events

a. In the event that notwithstanding the waiver provision of
IG, Defendant appeals or collaterally challenges his sentence, the
U.S. Attorney reserves the right to argue the correctness of the
sentence imposed by the district court in addition to arguing that
any appeal or collateral challenge is waived if such appeal or
collateral challenge is inconsistent with the waiver in IG.

b. If notwithstanding the waiver provision of TG, the
defendant seeks re-sentencing, he agrees that he will not seek to
be re-sentenced with the benefit of any change to the criminal
history category that the Court calculated at the time of the
defendant's original sentencing. Thus, for example, the defendant
will not seek to be re-sentenced based on the set aside of a prior
state-court conviction that occurs after sentencing.

c. In the event of a re-sentencing following an appeal from
or collateral challenge to Defendant's sentence, the U.S. Attorney
reserves the right to seek a departure from the Sentencing

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 6 of 8

Guidelines and a sentence outside the Sentencing Guidelines if, and
to the extent, necessary to reinstate the sentence advocated by the
U.S. Attorney at Defendant's initial sentencing pursuant to this
agreement.

8. Court Not Bound by Agreement

The sentencing recommendations made by the parties and their
respective calculations under the Sentencing Guidelines are not
binding upon the U.S. Probation Office or the sentencing judge.
Within the maximum sentence which Defendant faces under the
applicable law, the sentence to be imposed is within the sole
discretion of the sentencing judge. Defendant's plea will be
tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c){1)(B). Defendant may
not withdraw his plea of guilty regardless of what sentence is
imposed. Nor may Defendant withdraw his plea because the U.S.
Probation Office or the sentencing judge declines to follow the
Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations of the
parties. In the event that the sentencing judge declines to follow
the Sentencing Guidelines calculations or recommendations of the
U.S. Attorney, the U.S. Attorney reserves the right to defend the
sentencing judge’s calculations and sentence in any subsequent
appeal or collateral challenge.

9. Civil Liability

By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not
compromise any civil liability, including but not limited to any
tax liability, which Defendant may have incurred or may incur as a
result of his conduct and. his plea of guilty' to the charges
specified in paragraph 1 of this Agreement.

10. Rejection of Plea by Court

Should Defendant's guilty plea not be accepted by the Court
for whatever reason, or later be withdrawn on motion of Defendant,
this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the U.S.
Attorney.

11. Breach of Agreement

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to
comply with any provision of this Agreement, has violated any
condition of his pretrial release, or has committed any crime
following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may,
at his sole option, be released from his commitments under this
Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through counsel
or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also pursue all

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 7 of 8

remedies available to him under the law, irrespective of whether he
elects to be released from his commitments under this Agreement.
Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and all charges which
have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this Agreement.
Defendant recognizes that no such breach by him of an obligation
under this Agreement shall give rise to grounds for withdrawal of
his guilty plea. Defendant understands that, should he breach any
provision of this agreement, the U.S. Attorney will have the right
to use against Defendant before any grand jury, at any trial or
hearing, or for sentencing purposes, any statements which may be
made by him, and any information, materials, documents or objects
which may be provided by him to the government subsequent to this
Agreement, without any limitation. In this regard, Defendant
hereby waives any defense to any charges which he might otherwise
have under any statute of limitations or the Speedy Trial Act.

12. Who ls Bound BV Agreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusettsr and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state
or local prosecutive authorities.

13. Complete Aqreement

This letter contains the complete and only agreement between
the parties. No promises, representations or agreements have been

made other than those set forth in this letter. This Agreement
supersedes prior understandings, if any, of the parties, whether
written or oral. This Agreement can be modified or supplemented

only in a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the record
in court.

If this letter accurately reflects the Agreement between the
U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S.
Attorney Fred M. Wyshak, Jr.

Very truly yours,

MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN
United States Attorney

   

BY:

 

D AN'E c. FRENIERE, chief
White Collar Crime Section

Case 1:04-cr-10127-NG Document 63 Filed 05/15/2007 Page 8 of 8

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

1 have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it with
my attorney. I hereby acknowledge that it fully sets forth my
agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for the District
of Massachusetts. I further state that no additional promises or
representations have been made to me by any official of the United
States in connection with this matter. I understand the crimes to
which I have agreed to plead guilty, the maximum penalties for
those offenses and Sentencing Guideline penalties potentially
applicable to them. 1 am satisfied with the legal representation
provided to me by my attorney. We have had sufficient time to meet

and discuss my case. We have discussed the charges against me,
possible defenses I might have, the terms of this Plea Agreement
and. whether l should. go to trial. I an\ entering into this

Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly because I am guilty of
the offenses to which I am pleading guilty and I believe this

Agreement is in my best interest.

Sean Slater
Defendant

';//5 67

I certify that Defendant's Name has read this Agreement and
that we have discussed its meaning. I believe he understands the
Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely, voluntarily
and knowingly.

 

finn /’/VI/L§:v

¢harles P. McGinty, Esq.
Attorney for Defendant

Date: "“D"

