Case1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page[1l_c)ijD

C}crk's ()l`f`lce
U-SDC.. Mass.
DHl€'_.ii;L‘LM»
By LLL__

U.S. Department of Justice lji:pihg,-- Clerk

 

Michael J. Sullivan
Um`ted States Attorney
Distrz`ct of Massachuserrs

 

Main Recepzion.' (6[ 7) 748-3100 John Joseph Maakley Ur:ited States Courrhouse
Suile 9200
1 Cour:house Way
Boston. Massachusetrs 02210

March 13, 2006

Charles McGinty, Esq.
Federal Defender Office

408 Atlantic Ave., 3rd floor
Boston, MA 02210

Re: United States v. Gregory Smith
Criminal No. 04-10190-DPW

Dear Attorney McGinty:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United States
Attorney for the District of Massachusetts ("the U.S. Attorney")
and your client, Greg Smith ("Defendant"), in the above-captioned
case. The Agreement is as follows:

l. Change of Plea

At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall plead guilty
to the above-captioned Superseding Information, charging him with
selling a firearm to a convicted felon, in violation of Title lB,
United States Code, Section 922(d)(l). Defendant expressly and
unequivocally admits that he in fact knowingly, intentionally and
willfully committed the crime charged in the Superseding
Information, and is in fact guilty of that offense. The U.S.
Attorney agrees to dismiss the pending Indictment after the
defendant is sentenced on the Superseding Information.

2. Penalties

Defendant faces the following maximum penalties: a term of
incarceration of ten years; a term of supervised release of three
years; a fine of up to $250,000; a mandatory, $100 special

assessment.

3. Sentencinq Guidelines

Case 1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page 2 of 6

The parties agree to jointly take the following positions at
sentencing with regard to offense conduct under the United States
Sentencing Guidelines:

(A) Base Offense Level

The parties have agreed that the Defendant's Base Offense
Level is 24, pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 2K2.l(a)(2).

(B) Acceptance of Responsibility

The U.S. Attorney’s agreement that the disposition set forth
below is appropriate in this case is based, in part, on Defendant’s
prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the offense of
conviction in this case.

The U.S. Attorney specifically may, at his sole option, be
released from his commitments under this Agreement, including, but
not limited to, his agreement that paragraph 4 constitutes the
appropriate disposition of this case, if at any time between his
execution of this Agreement and sentencing, Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the
plea;

(b) Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the
offenses of conviction;

(c) Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under
U.S.S.G. § lBl.3;

(d) Fails to provide truthful information about his
financial status;

(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any
proceeding relating to the criminal conduct charged
in this case and any relevant conduct for which
Defendant is accountable under U.S.S.G. § lBl.3;

(f) Engages in acts which form a basis for finding that
Defendant has obstructed or impeded the
administration of justice under U.S.S.G. § 3C1.1;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates
any condition of release;

Case 1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page 3 of 6

(h) Commits a crime; and/or

(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision
of this Agreement.

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty, unless the Court rejects this Agreement under Fed.
R. Crim. P. 11(c)(5).

4. Agreed Disposition

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree pursuant to Fed. R.
Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C) that the following is the appropriate
disposition of this case:

(a)' a term of incarceration for 96 months;
(b) a term of three years' supervised release; and
(c) a mandatory special assessment of $lOO.

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant further agree that the above
disposition is the appropriate disposition even if it represents an
upward departure from the applicable Sentencing Guidelines range.

5. Payment of Mandatory Special Assessment

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to
the Clerk of the Court on or before the date of sentencing, unless
Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that
Defendant is financially unable to do so.

6. Probation Department Not Bound By Agreement

The sentencing disposition agreed upon by the parties and
their respective calculations under the Sentencing Guidelines are
not binding upon the United States Probation Office. Defendant's
plea will be tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C).
Defendant cannot withdraw his plea of guilty unless the sentencing
judge rejects this Agreement. If the sentencing judge rejects this
Agreement, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of
either the United States or Defendant. In this regard, Defendant
hereby waives any defense to any charges which he might otherwise
have under any statute of limitations or the Speedy Trial Act.

7. Information For Presentence Report

Defendant agrees to provide all information requested by the
U.S. Probation Office concerning his assets.

Case 1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page 4 of 6

8. Withdrawal of Plea By Defendant

Should Defendant move to withdraw his guilty plea at any time,
this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the U.S.
Attorney.

9. Breach of Agreement

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to
comply with any provision of this Agreement or has committed any
crime following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney
may, at his sole option, be released from his commitments under
this Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through
counsel or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also
pursue all remedies available to him under the law, irrespective of
whether he elects to be released from his commitments under this
Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and all
charges which have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to this
Agreement. Defendant recognizes that no such breach by him of an
obligation under this Agreement shall give rise to grounds for
withdrawal of his guilty plea. Defendant understands that, should
he breach any provision of this agreement, the U.S. Attorney will
have the right to use against Defendant before any grand jury, at
any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes, any statements
which may be made by him, and any information, materials, documents
or objects which may be provided by him to the government
subsequent to this Agreement, without any limitation. In this
regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges which he
might otherwise have under any statute of limitations or the Speedy
Trial Act.

10. Who Is Bound Bv Aqreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusetts, and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state
or local prosecutive authorities.

11. Complete Agreement

This letter contains the complete and only agreement between
the parties relating to the disposition of this case. No promises,
representations or agreements have been made other than those set
forth in this letter and in the proffer letter with the U.S.
Attorney's Office. This agreement supersedes prior understandings,

Case 1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page 5 of 6

if any, of the parties, whether written or oral, with the sole
exception of those contained in the proffer letter with the U.S.
Attorney's Office. This Agreement can be modified or supplemented
only in a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the record
in court.

If this letter accurately reflects the Agreement between the
U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also-sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S.
Attorney William H. Connolly.

Very truly yours,
MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN
United States Attorney

By: %/w/ /<'€’Q£__'

 

  

7_
William H. Connolly
Assistant U.S. Attorn y l

\j

Case 1:04-cr-10190-DPW Document 26 Filed 03/14/2006 Page 6 of 6

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

I have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it
with my attorney. I hereby acknowledge that it fully sets forth
my agreement with the United States Attorney’s Office for the
'District of Massachusetts. l further state that no additional
promises or representations have been made to me by any official
of the United States in connection with this_matter. I understand
the crime to which I have agreed to plead guilty, the maximum
penalties for that offense and Sentencing Guideline penalties
potentially applicable to it. I am satisfied with the legal
representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had
sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed
the charge against me, possible defenses I might have, the terms
of this Plea Agreement and whether I should go to trial. I am
entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly
because I am guilty of the offense to which I am pleading guilty
and I believe this Agreement is in my best interest.

 

Date: /B ”/O/"`Oé

I certify that Greg Smith has read this Agreement and that
we have discussed its meaning. I believe he understands the
Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely, voluntarily

&Maf (ijvl'j

¢harles McGinty, Esq. '
Attorney for Defendant

Date =_3_\L4_L_

