Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 1 ?ijg_/j/¢;/é/

United States Court of Appeals
For the First Circuit

 

NOS. 06-2?46, 07-108?
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Appellee,
v.
ANTHONY BUCCI and DAVID A. JORDAN,

Defendants, Appellants.

 

APPEALS FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

[Hon. Reginald C. Lindsay, U.S. District Judce]

 

Before

HOward, M,
Stahl, §eniQr Cizguit Judg§,
and BeSOSa, Distrjct Judg§.'

 

Rob§rt L, Sh§ketgf: and Anthony Bucci, pro §e, for appellant
Anthony Bucci.
Raymgg§ Q. Bigat for appellant David A. Jordan.
Dav v1§ A. §Qlla;, U. S. Department Of Just1ce Criminal Division,
with whom M1g_aal Q Sgll1v vag United States Attorney, was On brief
for appellee.

 

May 13, 2008

 

 

‘Of the District of Puerto Rico, 51tt1ng by designat1cn.

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 2 of 17

STAHL, Senior Circuit Judge. Defendant-appellant Anthony
Bucci was convicted for conspiracy to distribute, and to possess
with intent to distribute, over 500 grams of cocaine; possession
with intent to distribute cocaine; and the use or carrying of a
firearm during and in relation to a drug-trafficking crime.
Defendant-appellant David A. Jordan was convicted of conspiracy to
distribute, and to possess with intent to distribute, over 500
grams of cocaine; possession with intent to distribute cocaine; the
use or carrying of a firearm during and in relation to a drugF
trafficking crime; witness tampering; and three counts of making

false statements to the Drug Enforcement Administration ("DEA").

I. BACKGROUND

To the extent that these challenges involve the
sufficiency of the evidence, "[w]e recite the pertinent facts in
the light most favorable to the verdict." United States v. Downs-
Mgses, 329 F.3d 253, 257 (lst Cir. 2003). Jordan and Bucci's other
challenges do not involve serious factual disputes or do not demand
immediate resolution on direct appeal.

On July 6, 2004, a grand jury returned an eight-count

indictment; against Bucci, Jordan, and Francis "Skeeter“ Muolo.

 

lCount l charged the defendants with conspiracy to distribute,
and to possess with intent to distribute, over 500 grams of cocaine
in violation cIf 21 U.S.C. § 846. Count 2 charged them vdth
possession with intent to distribute over 500 grams of cocaine
pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § BQl(a)(l). Count 3 charged them with using

_2_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 3 of 17

Muolo pleaded guilty to the conspiracy and possession charges of
the indictment pursuant to an agreement with the Government. As
part of this agreement, Muolo agreed to provide testimony against
Bucci and Jordan (although he was not, in fact, called to the
stand). He was sentenced to fifty-seven months' imprisonment.

This case involves the robbery of a drug dealer by other
drug dealers, including' Bucci, and Jordan, a police officer.
Jordan, a member of the Malden, Massachusetts, Police Department
since 1985, became a narcotics detective during the mid-l990‘s. In
2003, Jordan renewed an old acquaintance with an individual named
Jon Minotti, a former corrections officer who worked in real estate
and as a plasterer. At some time during their renewed
relationship, Jordan began to purchase marijuana from Minotti, who
dealt drugs to support his own habit. Jordan expressed anger to
Minotti regarding the amount of money that cocaine dealers earned
through their illicit trade.

Sometime during 2003, Minotti informed.Bucci, another old

acquaintance for whom he had recently performed plastering work,2

 

or carrying a firearm during and in relation to a drug trafficking
crime, in violation of l8 U.S.C. § 9214(c)(l)(A). Count 4 charged
Jordan with witness tampering, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ l5l2(b)(3). Count 5 charged. Bucci with another count of
possession with intent to distribute cocaine. Finally, Counts 6
through 8 charged Jordan with making false statements to the DEA,
in violation of lS U.S.C. § l00l.

2Minotti and Bucci also engaged in several unrelated drug
transactions. The district court, however, excluded evidence
regarding these deals as unduly prejudicial. Thus, we will not

._3_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 4 of 17

of his friendship with Jordan. Also during 2003, Minotti met yet
another` drug dealer, Carlos Ruiz,3 fronl whonl he periodically
purchased ounce quantities of cocaine. Minotti introduced Bucci to
Ruiz later that year, but told Ruiz that Bucci's name was "Gino."

ln late November or early December 2003, while at the
apartment of a friend, Bryan Raftery,4 Bucci informed Minotti that
he wanted to rob Ruiz, with whom he was angry. Bucci devised a
plan in which Jordan would arrive to "bust" a drug deal between
Minotti and Puiz, allowing Minotti to escape with, the drugs.
Muolo, anothe: friend of Minotti, was recruited as Minotti‘s
getaway driver. Minotti relayed the proposal to Jordan, who
initially expressed some reluctance at participating.

Undeterred by Jordan's lack of enthusiasm for the scheme,
Bucci proceeded with alacrity. A few days before Christmas, Bucci

directed Minotti to order three kilograms of cocaine from Ruiz on

 

consider them in our review.

3Ruiz pleaded guilty to a separate indictment. He received
substantial sentence reductions in exchange for his testimony
against Bucci and Jordan. Additionally, he received safety valve
treatment for which, he almost certainly would not have been
eligible had the government disclosed information, adduced in this
case, to the sentencing court concerning numerous threats Ruiz made
against Minotti. The jury, of course, was entitled to credit
Ruiz's testimony, which was mostly corroborated by reliable
evidence, despite these inducements.

“Raftery, despite a grant of immunity, refused to testify at
the defendants' trial and was held in civil contempt. He
subsequently pleaded guilty to criminal contempt and was sentenced
to probation.

_4_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 5 of 17

his behalf. On December 23, after some negotiations, Minotti and
Ruiz settled an a price of either $2?,000.00 or $28,000.00 per
kilogram and agreed to meet at Minotti's house at lO:OO a.m, the
next day to complete the transaction. With time running short,
Minotti again solicited Jordan‘s help. Jordan, although still
ambivalent, proposed that everyone involved in the prospective
robbery meet in the parking lot of the Malden Medical Center the
next day.

Around 8:30 a.m. on December 24, Bucci, in his black 3500
Mercedes Benz, license plate number 3802YL, drove to Minotti's
house. Muolo apparently arrived separately. From there, Bucci,
Minottir and Muolo drove in Minotti's vehicle, a black Chevrolet
Avalanche, to the Medical Center. There, they met Jordan, who was
driving an unmarked police car, a tan Honda. Despite some
lingering reservations, he agreed to participate in the scheme in
exchange for $30,000.00. Jordan suggested that Minotti "escape"
with the stolen drugs through a strip of woods adjacent to the
Medical Center. From there, Minotti could reach a nearby street,
where Muolo world pick him up. Bucci proposed that Jordan call for
back-up to make the bust appear more realistic, but Jordan
demurred.

Unbeknownst to the conspirators, the DEA had tapped
Ruiz‘s phone es part of an ongoing, mostly unrelated narcotics

investigation. Around December 20, 2003, the DEA_ intercepted

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 6 of 17

communications between Ruiz and Minotti regarding the proposed
transaction. In response, the DEA set inn roving surveillance
outside Minotti's residence, commencing at approximately 9:00 a.m.
on December 24. At 9:l0 a.m., DEA Agent Jean Drouin and
Massachusetts State Police Sergeant Thomas Quin observed a black
Mercedes parked in the driveway with license plate number 3302YL,
but noted that Minotti's black Chevrolet Avalanche was absent.
When the agents returned at 9:42 a.m., the Mercedes was gone, but
Minotti‘s Avalanche had returned.

At 9:55 a.m., Ruiz arrived in a maroon Buick Park Avenue.
Ruiz and Minot:i left the house together in Ruiz's car to travel to
the Medical Center. After‘ a few seconds, however, Minotti
instructed Ruiz to turn around, under the pretense that he had
forgotten his cell phone. In reality, Minotti was experiencing
doubts about tie wisdom of robbing Ruiz. Leaving Ruiz in the car,
Minotti called Bucci to express these concerns. Minotti told Bucci
that the deal would not work anyway, falsely explaining that Ruiz
wanted to be paid before relinquishing physical possession of the
cocaine. Buccl instructed Minotti to hand over the phone to Ruiz.
After a conversation between the two, which Minotti overheardr Ruiz
agreed to bring all of the cocaine to the parking lot of the
Medical Center, to permit Bucci an opportunity to test its quality.

When Minotti and Ruiz arrived at the Medical Center they

pulled alongside Bucci‘s vehicle, which was positioned against a

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 7 of 17

rail, facing outward to the parking lot. Minotti exited the car,
taking with him all three kilograms of cocaine. After observing
Jordan‘s car entering the parking lot, perhaps twenty or third
yards distant, Minotti immediately fled down an embankment into the
woods carrying the three kilograms with him.

Jordan positioned his car directly behind Ruiz's Buick,
blocking Ruiz (but not. Bucci) fron\ escape. Jordan, in_ plain

clothes, exited the car, shouted "Malden Police," and pointed a gun

at Ruiz. Joroan ordered both Ruiz and Bucci from their vehicles
and frisked bcth men. Jordan searched Ruiz's car, examined his
license, and performed a warrant check. He did not, however,

perform any similar investigation of Bucci. Jordan then informed
Ruiz, "lt's your lucky day. l‘m going to let you go. You have a
merry Christmas." Ruiz returned to his car and left the parking
lot. Jordan ceparted the parking lot as well, driving directly
past Agent Drouin and Sergeant Quin's surveillance location. Bucci
left his car and entered the Medical Center. A few minutes later,
Jordan returned to the parking lot and drove to the entrance of the
Medical Center. Bucci exited the Medical Center, and the two men
had a brief conversation before going their separate ways.

Muolo and Minotti took the cocaine to Muolo's apartment
in Stoneham. Dnce Bucci arrived, the conspirators opened one of
the bags of cocaine. Taking the cocaine, Bucci indicated that he

planned to sell it and split the proceeds with the others. Because

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 8 of 17

Jordan was impatient to receive his share of the n©ney, Bucci,
Minotti, and Muolo decided to give him whatever cash was available
by the end of the night.

Later that afternoon, Ruiz and his brother-in-law,
Armando Lovos, arrived at Minotti‘s house in a blue SUV. Ruiz
suspected that the drug bust had been a setup, did not believe that
Jordan was a real police officer, and was unsurprisingly furious
with Minotti. Ruiz demanded that the cocaine be returned
immediately. Minotti replied that he had abandoned the drugs in
the woods and refused to return to search for them, ostensibly for
fear that the police would be there. Still unsatisfied, Ruiz
nevertheless left to search for the cocaine in the woods near the
Medical Center. After Ruiz‘s departure, Minotti called Bucci to
inform him of Fuiz‘s visit. Bucci suggested to Minotti that Jordan
should confront Ruiz at the Medical Center to demonstrate his
legitimacy. Minotti communicated this suggestion to Jordan, who
agreed to look for Ruiz at the Medical Center.

At the Medical Center, Jordan encountered Ruiz and Lovos.
Jordan took Lovos's identification, but did not run a warrant
check. lnstead, he simply instructed Ruiz and Lovos to leave the
area. Recordings from the DEA's wire on Ruiz substantiate that
Ruiz was convinced he had been ripped off and that he knew Jordan
was not an honest policeman. ln fact, Jordan‘s appearance only

reinforced Ruiz's suspicions, as he rightly inferred that one of

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 9 of 17

the conspirators had tipped Jordan off that Ruiz and Lovos were
returning to the Medical Center to search for the supposedly
abandoned cocaine.

At about 10:l5 p.m., Minotti received a voicemail from
Bucci indicating that he had left money in a "blue tub" outside
Minotti‘s back door. After finding the money, Minotti took
$5,000.00 for himself to satisfy an unrelated debt and delivered
the remainder to Jordan at his home. Jordan later complained that
the black bag contained only $l5,000.00 and demanded the rest of
his payment. Bucci, again via Minotti, promised Jordan that he
would receive the rest of his payment once Bucci was able to sell
the cocaine.

On December 26, Jordan stopped by Minotti's house to make
sure Minotti was unharmed, that Ruiz had not returned, and to
ascertain wher he would receive the rest of his money. Jordan
instructed Miaotti that, if questioned, he should tell law
enforcement officers that he had been acting as an informant for
Jordan in an attempt to catch Ruiz dealing drugs. Just then, Ruiz
appeared at Miiotti's home, accompanied by four or five henchmen.
Jordan left, covering his face in an unsuccessful bid to avoid
recognition.

Ruiz suggested that Minotti should get in the car with
him. Under tne pretext of getting his coat, Minotti returned

inside to call Jordan for help. Jordan suggested that Minotti call

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 10 of 17

the police ano complain about Ruiz trespassing, which Minotti did.
When the police arrived, Minotti informed them of his ostensible
role as Jordan's informant. The police instructed Ruiz, who
eventually admitted to them that he was there to collect a drug
debt, to leave.

At that point, Jordan apparently began to regret his role
in the scheme. At l:30 p.m. on December 26, Jordan called Agent
Drouin to inquire whether Ruiz was under investigation. During
this conversation, Jordan asked whether the DEA had attempted any
surveillance of Ruiz on December 24. Because Agent Drouin already
suspected Jordan of illegal activity, he told him that, while Ruiz
was a target, io operation had taken place on that particular day.
ln an apparent effort to cover his tracks, Jordan informed Agent
Drouin of certain, carefully-selected details regarding the drug
rip-off at the Medical Center. Several of these details, however,
were false.

Next, Jordan contacted Minotti and suggested that they
return the cocaine to Ruiz or pay him for it. Minotti communicated
to Bucci Jordan's desire to undo the robbery. Bucci responded that
this rescission would be "stupid" and dangerous, as he believed
trying to rescind the robbery would confirm Ruiz's suspicions about
the rip-off, compounding their problems. At a meeting in Stoneham,
Jordan returned a portion of his ill-gotten funds to Minotti, and

instructed him to give the money to Ruiz. Despite his reluctance,

_lO_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 11 of 17

Bucci agreed to surrender his share of the proceeds to Minotti. As
Bucci and Minotti attempted to gather the rest of the cocaine, they
received two frantic messages from Muolo indicating that something
bad had happened. When they arrived at Muolo's apartment, he
informed them that he had flushed the cocaine down the toilet.5
Minotti went home, took $2,000.00 of his wife's money, and.met Ruiz
at the Saugus mall to compensate him for the stolen cocaine.

In early May 2004, DEA agents arrested Ruiz. Although
Ruiz refused to cooperate fully against his suppliers in Mexico, he
agreed to provide information regarding the drug rip-off. He
picked Minotti and Bucci out of a lineup. Before Ruiz agreed to
cooperate, Agent Drouin called Jordan_'to inform ?Un1 of Ruiz's
arrest, but Jcrdan expressed very little interest.

On May l9, 2004, Minotti encountered Muolo, supposedly by
chance, at a Dunkin' Donuts. Muolo told Minotti that the police
had asked him :o cooperate against Minotti. He warned Minotti not
to answer the phone if he called and asked to meet at a baseball
field at 3:00 p.m. Minotti relayed this information to Jordan, who
instructed Minotti to tell Muolo to "keep his mouth shut" and
indicated that he did not want to talk to Minotti anymore. While

Minotti waitec for Muolo at their designated meeting place, DEA

 

5Later, Muolo informed Minotti that he had, in fact, given the
cocaine to Bucci and lied to the others at Bucci's request.

_ll._

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 12 of 17

Agent Mark Tully and Sergeant Quin approached Minotti, who agreed
to cooperate by wearing a body wire to a meeting with Jordan.

Minotti arranged to meet Jordan at a skating rink in
Malden. Although Jordan did not directly inculpate himself, he
made a ;dethora of highly suspicious statements that strongly
suggested that he was part of an unlawful conspiracy of some sort
with Minotti, Bucci, and Muolo. The next day, May 20, Jordan
attempted to speak with Minotti at his home, but Minotti refused to
answer the door. later, however, at Sergeant Quin's requestr
Minotti placed a recorded call to Jordan. During the call, Jordan
expressed further concern about Muolo, directing Minotti to tell
Muolo "not to give the bid out."

That same day, Agent Tully arrested Jordan. Agent
Drouin, supported by several other officers, arrested.Bucci outside
of his wife's tanning salon in Malden as he attempted to enter his
black Mercedes. After being informed of his rights, Bucci smugly
taunted the officers, "You didn't get me on any phones."
Eventually, Bucci's black Mercedes was seized and its contents were
inventoried, Of particular interest, the vehicle contained ninety-
one grams of cocaine dispersed in three separate plastic baggies
that were contained within one larger bag; two digital scales;

$6,653.00 in cash; four mobile phones and six separate SIM cards%

 

6a SIM, cr "security identity module," card is the device
within a phone that contains the unique information identifying a
particular subscriber.

_12_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 13 of 17

and a pager. Officer Jamie Cepero, a Massachusetts state trooper
assigned to the DEA task force, offered expert testimony regarding
the contents of Bucci's black Mercedes. He testified that the
above-mentioned items were probative of drug trafficking. Officer
Cepero opined that the quantity of drugs found in Bucci's car,
ninety-one grams, is inconsistent with mere personal use. Cepero
also testified that the contents of Bucci's car lacked indicia of
personal use, such as straws, mirrors, and razor blades.

On April l2, 2006, following a trial, a jury returned a
verdict of guilty against both Bucci and Jordan on all counts of
the indictment. On November l5, 2006, the district court sentenced
Bucci to a term of 252 months' imprisonment and Jordan to a term of
l80 months' imprisonment. The defendants filed timely notices of

appeal.

_.13_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 14 of 17

II. ANALYSIS

A- BB§ELT
l. lneffective Assistance

Bucci contends that his trial counsel's performance was
so deficient as to violate the Sixth Amendment and require reversal
of his convictions. "We have held with a regularity bordering on
the monotonous that fact-specific claims of ineffective assistance
cannot make their debut on direct review of criminal convictions,
but, rather, must originally be presented to, and acted upon by,
the trial court." United States v. Leahy, 4?3 F.3d QOl, 4l0 (lst

Cir. 2007) (quoting United §tates v. Mala, 7 F.3d l058, l063 (lst

 

Cir. l993} (internal quotation marks omitted)). Nevertheless, in
an exceptional case, the record may be adequately developed to
permit meaningful review. ld1 ln this instance, however, we are
unable to draw any reasoned conclusions from the cold record.
Bucci makes several fact-intensive complaints regarding
his trial counsel's purportedly deficient performance. First, he

asserts that trial counsel, in his opening argument, promised to

 

TBucci has filed four pro se motions that remain pending. We
deny Bucci's motion to supplement the record (Docket No. 102) and
his motion to correct the trial transcript (Docket No. l52). These
matters are better addressed by the district court on a petition
for collateral review. We grant Bucci's second motion to
supplement the record (Docket No. l28), given that the document in
question has already been made a part of the record by the district

court. lt is dot, however, pertinent to any issue pending before
us. Finally, we deny Bucci's motion to file a supplemental reply
brief (Docket No. l55). We require no further elaboration of his

claims of error.

_14_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 15 of 17

the jury that he would present an alibi witness, Lisa Murphy, who
would testify that Bucci's activities on December 24 were
inconsistent with the Government‘s theory of the case. Second,
Bucci complains that trial counsel addressed the prospective
testimony of Muolo during his opening statement, despite the fact
that the Government did not indicate an intention to call Muolo
during its own opening statement. Third, Bucci contends that trial
counsel rendered deficient performance by failing to lay the
foundation for and offer the testimony of Ross Minnoti, Jon
Minotti's brother, who was purportedly willing to testify that Jon
Minotti informed him that Bucci was innocent, and that he was only
implicating Btcci to save his own skin. These three issues are
best left for a collateral proceeding where Bucci will have the
opportunity tc develop the record to explicate his claim.

Lastly, we address trial counsel's closing argument.
During closing, trial counsel was twice admonished for naking
improper remarks. First, trial counsel asked rhetorically, "lf
Brly]an Raftery made those calls for Anthony Bucci, why didn't he
come in here and tell you about them?" Following an objection by
the Governmen:, the district court gave a forceful limiting
instruction, informing the jury that trial counsel's remarks were
improper and tnat "the government had intended to call Mr. Raftery
and he, Mr. Raftery, refused to testify. He is absent in this case

because he refuses to be present." Later, trial counsel accused

_15_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 16 of 17

the Government of knowingly and deliberately presenting perjured
testimony. Again, the district court instructed the jury that
trial counsel's actions were improper.

Undoubtedly, the limiting instructions issued by the
district judge in response to trial counsel's remarks did little to
advance Bucci's cause before the jury. At the same time, these
events do not independently give rise to sufficient prejudice to
merit reversal of Bucci's convictions. At worst, they may have
cost Bucci some of the good will of the jury. The evidence against
Bucci was overwhelming, and trial counsel's comments and the
corresponding limiting instructions did nothing tt) add 'to the
mountain of inculpatory evidence arrayed against him. Federal
agents observed Bucci's vehicle at Minotti's house the morning of
the rip-off; Bucci was observed by federal agents at the scene of
the crime, parked alongside Ruiz; the agents observed Bucci
speaking with Jordan outside the Medical Center immediately after
the rip-off; and cocaine, two digital scales, $6,653.00 in cash,
four mobile phones and six separate SIM cards, and a pager were
found in Bucci‘s vehicle upon his arrest. Finally, of course,
Minotti's and, to a lesser extent, Ruiz's testimony directly
implicated Buc:i in the crime.

2. Matters Related tQ §Qverance
Bucci argues that the district court erred by denying his

motion to sever. At issue is Exhibit 24, a recording of a May l9,

_16_

Case 1:04-cr-10194-RCL Document 391 Filed 05/14/2008 Page 17 of 17

2004, conversation between Bucci's codefendant, Jordan, and
Minotti, in which Bucci‘s name is mentioned. The recording was
properly introduced against Jordan as an admission. The district
court ruled, however, that Jordan's statements were inadmissible
hearsay in relation to Bucci. The district court denied Bucci's
pretrial motion to sever as well as his trial motion to redact his
name from the statements. To protect Bucci from unfair prejudice,
the district court, on two separate occasions, instructed the jury
that the statements were not admissible against Bucci. Bucci
concedes that his Confrontation Clause rights were not violated
because Jordan testified in his own defense at trial. California
v. §reen, 399 U.S. 149, 164 (l970) 1holding that "the Confrontation
Clause does not require excluding from evidence the prior
statements of a witness who concedes making those statements"}.
Thus, the issue at hand is one of evidence rather than
constitutional law.

We "review the denial of a motion to sever only for a
manifest abuse of discretion." United States v. §age, F.Bd

, , 2008 WL 820741, at *6 (lst Cir. Mar. 28, 2008).

"[S]everance is particularly difficult to obtain where, as here,

multiple defendants share a. single indictment." ld1 (quoting
United 8tates v. Qa§a§, 425 F.Bd 23, 37 (lst Cir. 2005) (internal
quotation marks omitted)). To merit reversal on the basis of a

district court‘s denial of severance, a "defendant must show

_1'7'_

