            Case 1:04-cr-10201-MLW         Document 81         Filed 06/21/2007       Page 1 of 4


                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                            FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

                v.                                            CRIMINAL NO. 04-10201-MLW

MIGUEL REYES
                        Defendant(s).

                                  PROCEDURAL ORDER
                     RE: SENTENCING HEARING (In the light of U.S. v.Booker.)

WOLF, D.J.

       A plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or a verdict of guilty, having been entered on JUNE 21, 2007,
under the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, it is hereby ORDERED:

Pre-sentence Investigation

       1.       a)      The United States Probation Office shall commence immediately the pre-sentence
                investigation unless as provided in Fed. R. Crim. Pro. Rule 32(i), the court finds under Rule
                32 (c) (1)(A) and (B) that the information in the record enables it to exercise its sentencing
                authority meaningfully under 18 U.S.C. § 3553 and the court explains this finding on the
                record.

                b)     The Probation Office shall prepare pre-sentence investigation reports in the order in
                which the requests from the court are received.

Statement of Relevant Facts

       2.       Not later than seven days after the plea or verdict [or on JUNE 28, 2007], the attorney for
                the government shall provide to the United States Probation Office a statement of relevant
                facts and any other documents pertinent under Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 32 (d)
                and shall simultaneously serve on counsel for the defendant a copy of everything provided
                to the Probation Office.

Submission of Information Regarding Identifiable Victims (if applicable)

       3.       Not later than seven days after the plea or verdict [or on JUNE 28, 2007], the attorney for
                the government shall provide to the United States Probation Office a written statement
                setting forth the names of the victims, their contact information/addresses, and the amount
                of loss sustained by each victim/restitution owed to each victim pursuant to the Federal
                Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 32(c)(1)(B).
            Case 1:04-cr-10201-MLW          Document 81         Filed 06/21/2007        Page 2 of 4


Interview of Defendant

       4.       The Probation Office shall provide a reasonable opportunity for defense counsel to attend
                any interview of the defendant conducted by a probation officer during the pre-sentence
                investigation.

                a)      If the case is resolved by a plea, and the Probation Office has timely notification of
                the plea, it shall hold an interview with the defendant on the day of the plea. If an interview
                cannot be held on the day of the plea, the Probation Office shall schedule an interview to be
                held within seven days after the plea or within such additional time as the court may order.

                b)     If the case is resolved by a verdict, the Probation Office shall schedule an interview
                with the defendant to be held within seven days after the verdict or within such additional
                period of time as the court may order.

                c)      If the defendant is in custody, the United States Marshal shall, at the request of the
                Probation Office, bring the defendant to the courthouse for an interview at the earliest
                feasible time.

Pretrial Services Responsibility

       5.       Pretrial Services shall provide to the Probation Office all documents in the possession of
                Pretrial Services that may be relevant to the pre-sentence investigation, including a copy of
                the Pretrial Report, the defendant’s state, local, and national criminal record, police reports,
                copies of convictions, drug test results, reports of incidents, and other reports and supporting
                documents.

Date of Sentencing

       6.       The sentencing hearing (and sentencing) is scheduled to occur at 3:00 p.m. on SEPTEMBER
                19, 2007, in courtroom 10 on the 5th floor. This date is to be not sooner than ten weeks after
                the date of the plea/verdict, in order to permit the following:

                a)     Probation Office shall have three weeks after the date of plea/verdict for the
                preparation and disclosure of the initial report.

                b)     Probation Office shall disclose the initial report to defense counsel and government
                counsel no less than three weeks before the sentencing hearing, unless the defendant
                expressly waives the minimum five week pre-sentencing notification period.

                c)      The date when disclosure has been effected to each attorney is the date of the mailing
                of a copy to that attorney. An attorney may, in lieu of receiving disclosure by mail, make
                arrangements with the Probation Office to pick up the report no later than 3:00 p.m. on the
                date disclosure is due. It is the responsibility of the defense counsel to disclose the pre-
                sentence report to the defendant and to discuss it with and explain it to the defendant.

Objections Procedure

                                                     -2-
           Case 1:04-cr-10201-MLW          Document 81         Filed 06/21/2007        Page 3 of 4


      7.       Within seven days after disclosure of the report, attorneys for the government and the
               defendant shall advise the probation officer and each other in writing, of any objections they
               may have as to any material information, sentencing classifications, sentencing guideline
               ranges, or policy statements contained in or omitted from the report.

      8.       The probation officer shall conduct any further investigation and make any revisions to the
               pre-sentence report that may be necessary. The probation officer may require counsel for
               both parties to confer with the probation officer to identify and attempt to resolve any factual
               or legal disputes which may require hearing by the court.

Final Pre-sentence Report

      9.       Not later than SEPTEMBER 12, 2007 (which is a date not less than seven days before
               the sentencing hearing), the probation officer shall submit to the court and disclose to the
               attorneys the final pre-sentence report, including any addendum, setting forth the unresolved
               objections, the grounds for these objections and the probation officer’s comments on the
               objections. The probation officer shall certify that the contents of the report, including any
               revisions, and the addendum have been disclosed to the defendant and to counsel for the
               defendant and the government, and that the addendum fairly states any remaining unresolved
               objections. Except with regard to any unresolved objections, the report of the pre-sentence
               investigation may be accepted by the court as accurate. The court, however, for good cause
               shown, may allow a new objection to the pre-sentence report to be raised at any time before
               the imposition of sentence.

Hearing and Counsel’s obligations

      10.      The Court is to hold a sentencing hearing to resolve any disputed issues.

               a)     Obligations of Counsel:      Not less than five days before the sentencing hearing
               [or such other time as set by the court]. If the parties would like to file any motions,
               memorandum or other pleadings for the court to consider at sentencing they shall be filed
               by SEPTEMBER 5, 2007. Any responses shall be filed by SEPTEMBER 12, 2007.

                      (1)     Notice:         Counsel are to advise the Court:

                              (a)     whether either party will move for a departure from the applicable
                                      guideline range or will move for a non guideline sentence;

                              (b)     whether apart from (a), there are legal questions not adequately
                                      addressed in the presentence report or not addressed at all;

                              (c)     whether there are factual issues which the party contend require an
                                      evidentiary hearing.

                      (2)     Memorandum:            Counsel shall submit a memorandum outlining the
                              legal and factual issues implicated in (1) above. Counsel are also urged to


                                                    -3-
            Case 1:04-cr-10201-MLW              Document 81        Filed 06/21/2007       Page 4 of 4


                                    draft memoranda in the form of proposed findings of fact and conclusions of
                                    law relevant to the issues described above.

                            (3)     Service on Probation:        A copy of the memorandum and any
                                    submissions addressing sentencing issues submitted by counsel must also be
                                    provided to the probation officer five days in advance of the sentencing
                                    hearing.

          11.        The schedule set forth in this Order may be modified by the Court for good cause shown.

          12.        Disclosure of the pre-sentence report is made under the provisions of Rule 32, Fed. R. Crim.
                     Pro., except that the Probation Office shall not disclose any recommendation it made to the
                     court as to sentence. Any such recommendation made to the court by the Probation Office
                     must not contain factual information not already disclosed to both counsel and to the
                     defendant.

June 21, 2007                                              /s/ Mark L. Wolf
DATE                                                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE



cc:       Counsel
          Probation Office
          Pretrial Services


procosen-order.wpd




                                                         -4-
