Case1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 1 of 7

[LS.DeparunentofJuche

 

_Michael J. Sullivan
United States Attorney
fhsndctqudds$achusens

 

Maz‘n Receprion: (6] 7) 748-3100 John Joseph Moakley Um'ted Srates Courthouse
I Courzhouse Way
Su:'te 9200
Boston, Massr;rchusefrs 022] 0

June 19, 2006

John W. Laymon
77 Franklin Street, #3
Boston, MA 02110

Re: United States vs. Luis DeJesus
Criminal No. 04-10299~PBS

 

Dear Counsel:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United
States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts (“the U.S.
Attorney") and your client, Luis DeJesus, ("Defendant"), in the
above-captioned case. The Agreement is as follows:

l. Change of Plea

Defendant shall plead guilty to Count One of the Second
.Superseding Indictment, charging conspiracy to distribute
cocaine, in violation of Title 2l, United States Code, Sections
846 and 84l(a)(l)§ Defendant expressly and unequivocally admits
that he in fact knowingly, intentionally and willfully committed
the crime charged in Count One of the Second Superseding
Indictment, and is in fact guilty of that offense.

2. Penalties

For Count One, Defendant faces the following minimum
mandatory and maximum penalties: a term of imprisonment of not
less than five(E) years or more than life; a fine up to
$4,000,000; a period of supervised release of at least 5 years
and up to life; and a $100 special assessment.

Defendant may also be deportable and/or excludable by the
United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement as a
consequence of his conviction of the offenses to Which he is
pleading guilty.

Case 1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 2 of 7

The sentence to be imposed upon Defendant is within the
discretion of the sentencing Court, subject to the statutory
maximum and mandatory minimum penalties set forth above, and the
provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act and the United States
Sentencing Guidelines promulgated thereunder, as modified by
United States v. Booker and United States v. Fanfan, 125 S.Ct.
738, 2005 WL 50108 (January 12, 2005). In imposing the sentence,
the Court must consult and take into account the United States
Sentencing Guidelines, along with the other factors set forth in
18 U.S.C. §3553 (a) .

3. Sentencing Guidelines

With respect to the application of the United States
Sentencing Guidelines:

(a) Both parties agree to take the position that the
Defendant’s-base offense level, pursuant to U.S.S.G. §2Dl.l{c)(4)
and §lBl.B is 26, Defendant is responsible for at least 500 grams
of cocaine but less than two kilograms of cocaine which quantity
represents the total drug quantity involved in Defendant’s
relevant criminal conduct, including amounts Defendant
distributed or possessed with intent to distribute and amounts
distributed or possessed with intent to distribute by co-
conspirators of Defendant pursuant to jointly undertaken criminal
activity that was reasonably foreseeable by Defendant and within
the scope of Defendant's conspiratorial agreement.

(b) Both parties agree to take the position thatr pursuant
to U.S.S.G. §4Bl.l, Defendant is a career offender for purposes
of that provision because he was (l) at least 18 years old at the
time of the instant offense, (2) the instant offense of
conviction is a felony that is a controlled substance offense,
and (3) he has at least two prior felony convictions for a
controlled substance offense. Defendant acknowledges and agrees
that he was adequately represented by counsel in those cases.

(c) Defendant will take the position that his criminal
history category should be decreased by one category pursuant to
U.S.S.G. §4Al.3(b). The government will oppose this request.

(d) Based on Defendant’s prompt acceptance of personal
responsibility for the offenses of conviction in this case, and
information known to the U.S. Attorney at this time, the U.S.
Attorney agrees to recommend that the Court reduce by three
levels Defendant’s Adjusted Offense Level under U.S.S.G. § 3El.l.

The U.S. Attorney specifically reserves the right not to

2

Case 1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 3 of 7

recommend a reduction under U.S.S.G. § 3El.l if, at any time
between his execution of this Agreement and sentencing Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the
plea;

(b} Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the
offenses of conviction; '

(c} Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under
U.S.S.G. §lBl.E;

(d) Fails to provide truthful information about his
financial status;

(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any
proceeding relating to the criminal conduct
charged in this case and any relevant conduct for
which Defendant is accountable under U.S.S.G. §
lBl.3;

(f} Engages in acts which form a basis for finding
that Defendant has obstructed or impeded the
administration of justice under U.S.S.G.l § 3Cl.l;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates
any condition of release;

(h) Commits a crime;

(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision
of this Agreement; and/or

(j) Attempts to withdraw his guilty plea.

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty if, for any of the reasons listed above, the U.S.
Attorney does not recommend that he receive a reduction in
Offense Level for acceptance of responsibility.

Defendant expressly understands that, in addition to
declining to recommend an acceptance-of~responsibility
adjustment, the chernment may seek an upward adjustment pursuant
to U.S.S.G. § 3Cl.l if Defendant obstructs justice after date of
this Agreement.

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that there is no basis

Case 1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 4 of 7

for a departure from the sentencing range established by the
United States Sentencing Guidelines, except as specifically
provided in paragraph 3(c) above. Except as provided in
paragraph 3(c) above, neither the U.S. Attorney nor Defendant
will seek a departure on any ground from the Sentencing
Guidelines. `

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty, unless the Court rejects this Agreement under
Fed R. Crim. P. ll(c)(E).

4. Agreed Disposition

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree pursuant to Fed. R.
Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C) that the following is the appropriate

disposition of this case:

(a) a term of incarceration of at least 140 months but
not more than 188 months;

(b) mandatory special assessment of $100;
(c) a term of supervised release of five years.

5. Pavment of Mandatory Special Assessment

 

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to
the Clerk of the Court on or before the date of sentencing,
unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court
that Defendant is financially unable to do so.

6. Waiver of Rights to Appeal

 

Defendant has conferred with his attorney and understands
that he has the right to challenge his sentence on direct appeal.
Defendant agrees that he will not file a direct appeal of any
imprisonment sentence of 188 months or less. This provision is
binding even if the Court employs a Guidelines analysis different
from that set forth in this Agreement.

7. Probation Department Not Bound By Agreement

 

The sentencing disposition agreed upon by the parties and _
their respective calculations under the Sentencing Guidelines are
not binding upon the United States Probation Office. Defendant's
plea will be tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C).
Defendant cannot withdraw his plea of guilty unless the
sentencing judge-rejects this Agreement. If the sentencing judge

4

Case 1:04-cr-10_299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 5 of 7

rejects this Agreement} this Agreement shall be null and void at
the option of either the United States or Defendant. In this '
regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges which
he might otherwise have under any statute of limitations or the

Speedy Trial Act. `

8. Information For Presentence Report

Defendant agrees to provide all information requested by the
U.S. Probation Office concerning his assets.

9. civil tiabiiity

By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not
compromise any civil liability, including but not limited to any
tax liability, which Defendant may have incurred or may incur as
a result of his conduct and his plea of guilty to the charges
specified in paragraph one of this Agreement.

10. Rejection of Plea Bv Court

Should Defendant's guilty plea not be accepted by the Court
for whatever reason, or later be withdrawn on motion of
Defendant, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of
the U.S. Attorney.

ll. Breach of Agreement

 

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to
comply with any provision of this Agreement, has violated any
condition of his pretrial releasey or has committed any crime
following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may,
at his sole option, be released from his commitments under this
Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through
counsel or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also
pursue all remedies available to him under the law, irrespective
of whether he elects to be released from his commitments under
this Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and
all charges which have been, or are to bed dismissed pursuant to
this Agreement. Defendant recognizes that no such breach by him
of an obligation under this Agreement shall give rise to grounds
for withdrawal of his guilty plea. Defendant understands that,
should he breach any provision of this agreement, the U.S.
Attorney will have the right to use against Defendant before any
grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes,
any statements which may be made by him, and any information,
materials, documents or objects which may be provided by him to
the government subsequent to this Agreement without any

Case 1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 6 of 7

limitation. In this regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense
to any charges which he might otherwise have under any statute of
limitations or the Speedy Trial Act.

12. Who ls Bound By Agreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusetts, and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state
or local prosecutive authorities.

13. Complete Agreement

This letter contains the complete and only agreement between
the parties relating to the disposition of this case. No
promises, representations or agreements have been made. This
Agreement supersedes prior understandings, if any, of the
parties, whether written or oral. This Agreement can be modified
or supplemented only in a written memorandum signed by the
parties or on the record in court.

If this letter accurately reflects the Agreement between the
U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U. S.
Attorney Neil Gallagher.

Very truly yours,

MI CH_AEL J. SULLIVAN
United States Attorney

siva l§w¢¢-

LAURA J. KAPLW
Chief, Organized and Violent
Crime Section

Neil J. Gallagher, Jr.
Assistant U.S. Attorney

Case 1:04-cr-10299-PBS Document 438 Filed 06/23/2006 Page 7 of 7

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLE'.A AGREEMENT

l have had this letter read to me in my native language, and
have discussed it with my attorney. l hereby acknowledge that it
fully sets forth my agreement with the United States Attorney‘s
Office for the District of Massachusetts. I further state that
no additional promises or representations have been made to me by
any official of the United States in connection with this matter.
I understand the crimes to which I have agreed to plead guilty,
the maximum penalties for those offenses and Sentencing Guideline
penalties potentially applicable to them. l am satisfied with
the legal representation provided to me by my attorney. We have
had sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have
discussed the charges against me, possible defenses l might have,
the terms of this Plea Agreement and whether I should go to
trial. I am entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily,
and knowingly because I am guilty of the offenses to which I am
pleading guilty and l believe this Agreement is in my best
interest.

mfg il x DQiOAQ/‘A

LUIs DEJEsUs ll
Defendant

mata ®~2'3~ 66

 

I certify that Defendant has had this Agreement read to him
in his native language and that we have discussed its meaning. l
believe he understands the Agreement and is entering into the
Agreement freely, voluntarily and knowingly.

 

Attorney for Defendant

Date: 419 !:Z:%Y£;

