           Case 3:05-cr-30003-MAP      Document 48       Filed 01/11/2006     Page 1 of 4


                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

               v.                                 CRIMINAL NO. 05-30003-MAP

    GODFREY TANDOH
                             Defendant

                                    PROCEDURAL ORDER
                                  RE: SENTENCING HEARING


PONSOR. D.J.


      A plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or a verdict of guilty, having been entered on 1/6/06,
under the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, it is hereby ORDERED:

Pre-sentence Investigation

      1.       a)     The United States Probation Office shall commence immediately the pre-
               sentence investigation unless as provided in Fed. R. Crim. Pro. Rule 32(c), the
               court finds under Rule 32(b)(1)(A) and (B) that the information in the record
               enables it to exercise its sentencing authority meaningfully under 18 U.S.C. §
               3553 and the court explains this finding on the record.
               b)     The Probation Office shall prepare pre-sentence investigation reports in
               the order in which the requests from the court are received.

Statement of Relevant Facts

      2.       Not later than seven days after the plea or verdict or on 1/13/06, the attorney for
               the government shall provide to the United States Probation Office a statement of
               relevant facts and any other documents pertinent under Federal Rules of
               Criminal Procedure 32(b) (4) and shall simultaneously serve on counsel for the
               defendant a copy of everything provided to the Probation Office.
                                                                              [kprocosen.]




Interview of Defendant
           Case 3:05-cr-30003-MAP       Document 48       Filed 01/11/2006     Page 2 of 4


      3.       The Probation Office shall provide a reasonable opportunity for defense counsel
               to attend any interview of the defendant conducted by a probation officer during
               the pre-sentence investigation.
               a)     If the case is resolved by a plea, and the Probation Office has timely
               notification of the plea, it shall hold an interview with the defendant on the day of
               the plea. If an interview cannot be held on the day of the plea, the Probation
               Office shall schedule an interview to be held within seven days after the plea or
               within such additional time as the court may order.
               b)     If the case is resolved by a verdict, the Probation Office shall schedule an
               interview with the defendant to be held within seven days after the verdict or
               within such additional period of time as the court may order.
               c)     If the defendant is in custody, the United States Marshal shall, at the
               request of the Probation Office, bring the defendant to the courthouse for an
               interview at the earliest feasible time.

Pretrial Services Responsibility

      4.       Pretrial Services shall provide to the Probation Office all documents in the
               possession of Pretrial Services that may be relevant to the pre-sentence
               investigation, including a copy of the Pretrial Report, the defendant’s state, local,
               and national criminal record, police reports, copies of convictions, drug test
               results, reports of incidents, and other reports and supporting documents.

Date of Sentencing

      5.       The sentencing hearing (and sentencing) is scheduled to occur at 2:00 pm on
               April 12, 2006, in courtroom 1 on the 5TH floor. This date is to be not sooner
               than ten weeks after the date of the plea/verdict, in order to permit the following:
               a)     Probation Office shall have five weeks after the date of plea/verdict for
               the preparation and disclosure of the initial report.
               b)     Probation Office shall disclose the initial report to defense counsel and
               government counsel no less than five weeks before the sentencing hearing,
               unless the defendant expressly waives the minimum five week pre-sentencing
               notification period.
               c)     The date when disclosure has been effected to each attorney is the date
               of the mailing of a copy to that attorney. An attorney may, in lieu of receiving

                                                 -2-
           Case 3:05-cr-30003-MAP       Document 48        Filed 01/11/2006     Page 3 of 4


               disclosure by mail, make arrangements with the Probation Office to pick up the
               report no later than 3:00 p.m. on the date disclosure is due. It is the
               responsibility of the defense counsel to disclose the pre-sentence report to the
               defendant and to discuss it with and explain it to the defendant.

Objections Procedure

      6.       Within fourteen days after disclosure of the report, attorneys for the
               government and the defendant shall advise the probation officer and each other
               in writing, of any objections they may have as to any material information,
               sentencing classifications, sentencing guideline ranges, or policy statements
               contained in or omitted from the report.

      7.       The probation officer shall conduct any further investigation and make any
               revisions to the pre-sentence report that may be necessary. The probation officer
               may require counsel for both parties to confer with the probation officer to identify
               and attempt to resolve any factual or legal disputes which may require hearing by
               the court.

Final Pre-sentence Report

      8.       Not later than April 5, 2006, (which is a date not less than seven days
               before the sentencing hearing), the probation officer shall submit to the court
               and disclose to the attorneys the final pre-sentence report, including any
               addendum, setting forth the unresolved objections, the grounds for these
               objections and the probation officer’s comments on the objections. The
               probation officer shall certify that the contents of the report, including any
               revisions, and the addendum have been disclosed to the defendant and to
               counsel for the defendant and the government, and that the addendum fairly
               states any remaining unresolved objections. Except with regard to any
               unresolved objections, the report of the pre-sentence investigation may be
               accepted by the court as accurate. The court, however, for good cause shown,
               may allow a new objection to the pre-sentence report to be raised at any time
               before the imposition of sentence.
Hearing


                                                 -3-
              Case 3:05-cr-30003-MAP         Document 48      Filed 01/11/2006    Page 4 of 4


         9.        The court is to hold a sentencing hearing to resolve any disputed issues.
                   a)       In resolving any disputed issues, the court may consider any reliable
                   information presented by the probation officer, the defendant, or the government.


                   b)       Not less than five days before the sentencing hearing, counsel are to
                   advise the clerk if counsel for either party contends that an evidentiary hearing is
                   necessary, and shall advise the clerk of the amount of time counsel expects
                   would be required to complete the hearing.
                   c)       If either counsel wishes to submit a memorandum supporting any
                   recommendations as to a sentence within the guideline range or a departure
                   from the guideline range, including proposed findings of fact and conclusions, he
                   or she must do so not less than three [or such alternative time as set by the
                   court] days before the sentencing hearing. A copy of any memorandum
                   submitted by counsel must also be provided to the probation officer.

         10.       The schedule set forth in this order may be modified by the court for good cause
                   shown.

         11.       Disclosure of the pre-sentence report is made under the provisions of Rule 32,
                   Fed. R. Crim.Pro., except that the Probation Office shall not disclose any
                   recommendation it made to the court as to sentence. Any such recommendation
                   made to the court by the Probation Office must not contain factual information not
                   already disclosed to both counsel and to the defendant.

1/11/06                                                /s/ Michael A. Ponsor
DATE                                                   UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

cc:      Counsel
         Probation Office
         Pretrial Services
(ProcO Sentencing.wpd - 4/25/02)                                                  [kprocosen.]




                                                     -4-
