   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW     Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 1 of 8



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA           )
                                   )   CRIMINAL NO. 05-10059-DPW
          v.                       )
                                   )
CHAD BENJAMIN                      )



                            MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
                                May 10, 2007


     This case presents the cognitive tension that ensues when a

justifiable police encounter developes into an unjustifiable

police pat down resulting in the seizure of a concealed weapon.

After the discovery of the weapon, any hunch or suspicion that

the suspect was armed appears reasonable in retrospect.             But the

legal touchstone is whether the facts giving rise to the police

search before its results are assessed can be said to be

sufficient to constitute reasonable suspicion.          Cf. United States

v. Wright, No. 06-1351, slip op. at 12-16 (1st Cir. May 4, 2007)

"It is a central tenet of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence that the

fruits of a search cannot be used to establish that same search's

validity."     Id. at 13.    My extended review of the evidentiary

record in this case, including evaluation of the credibility of

witnesses who appeared live before me and multiple rereadings of

the transcript, compels me to find the pat down of the defendant

here was not supported by reasonable suspicion ex ante and

accordingly the weapon seized must be suppressed ex post.
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW    Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 2 of 8



                        I.    FINDINGS OF FACT

                                   -A-

     Following a full evidentiary hearing, reflected in the three

volumes of transcript, and consideration of the party's post-

hearing memorandum, I find the facts to be as follows:

     On December 16, 2004 some 20 to 30 law enforcement personnel

participating in the South Coast Anti-Crime Team (“Scat”), a

multi-jurisdictional task force, gathered in Taunton,

Massachusetts to execute multiple arrest warrants based on

undercover narcotics transactions pursuant to an operation styled

“Operation Crack Down.”      After staging that morning at the

Taunton Police Station, the operation began at about noon with

two squads of 6 to 8 officers each breaking out to track down the

targets.   Among the targets was 17-year-old Jesse Santos Texeira,

who the police had reason to believe could be found at the

Taunton High School in basketball practice.

     Around 3:30 p.m., Detective Sergeant Michael Grundy of the

Taunton Police Department, who was overseeing the operation, was

driving through the City with Team members John O’Neill of the

Bristol County Sheriff’s Office, James Dykas of the Taunton

Police Department and Gregory Ryan of the Swansea Police

Department.   The officers were armed and dressed in raid jackets

with visible badges on chains.      Although a different squad had

been assigned the task of arresting Texeira--presumably at the


                                    2
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW   Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 3 of 8



high school--Detective Grundy and the officers with him drove by

Texeira’s house.   The officers had no intention of stopping there

or otherwise finding out if anyone was home but when they

observed two young black men walking down the driveway to

Texeira's home, Grundy directed a U-turn to make further

observations.   They saw the men, at least one of whom, later

identified as the defendant Benjamin, arguably matched

identifying information the officers had regarding Texeira,1 walk

into Egan's Liquor Store.

     The officers parked their car outside Egan’s and entered the

small and cramped store where they saw the two men at the

counter.   Ryan was the first officer in, followed by Dykas,

Grundy and then O’Neil.     Grundy and Dykas asked the two men--the

defendant Chad Benjamin and Edson Miranda, who were two or three

feet away--for identification.     Benjamin, who was dressed in a

loose fitting sweatshirt, patted his clothing and then said his

identification was in his car outside.      Benjamin was told to put

his hands up.   Grundy then began patting Benjamin down; feeling a

hard object which he identified as a weapon, Grundy yelled “Gun”

and brought Benjamin to the ground and arrested him.          He removed


     1
       The initial match was at best, however, approximate and
depended simply on general skin color. The 26-year-old defendant
Benjamin was 5'11" tall, weighed 190 pounds and had a light-brown
complexion. Texeira was 17-years-old, 6-feet tall, weighed 170
pounds and had a dark complexion. Nevertheless, the two men
observed by the officers were wearing hooded sweatshirts so their
specific features were obscured.

                                   3
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW   Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 4 of 8



a .380 automatic pistol from Benjamin’s pocket.         Benjamin did not

resist or attempt to flee at any point during the confrontation.

                                  -B-

     For purposes of making clear the factual basis upon which I

am allowing the defendant’s motion to suppress, I also identify

the central disputed factual assertion by the government which I

expressly decline to make:

     I find that until after he began patting the defendant down,

Detective Grundy had no articulable basis to believe that

Benjamin was carrying a concealed weapon.

                                  -C-

     Because my findings depend upon credibility determinations

drawn from my observation of the witnesses during the hearing, I

will also make certain comments upon the testimony.

     First and most fundamentally, I have concluded, after the

most careful review and consideration of the record, that

contrary to his testimony Detective Grundy did not commence the

pat down after observation of furtive motions or any other

indicia suggesting Benjamin had a concealed weapon.          Rather I

find that Detective Grundy acted upon a hunch--later validated--

which upon recollective reconstruction he has transmuted into a

series of uncorroborated purported suspicious observations.            In

this connection, I have considered the unlikelihood that any

observation of the weapon seized could be made through a loose


                                   4
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW   Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 5 of 8



fitting sweatshirt of the type the defendant was wearing and have

also concluded that Benjamin's own pat of his sweatshirt was

consistent with an effort at locating identification.

     Second, while in another setting I might undertake to

resolve the inconsistencies in the testimony of the package store

employees, I find the conflicting potential biases of these

individuals--from the desire of Ms. Busczek somehow to embarrass

her former employer for her subsequent termination on grounds of

stealing to the desire of the remaining employee Mr. Higginbotham

and the owner Don Walsh, whose business can be affected by the

good or bad will of police officers, to deny having seen anything

untoward at the time or in review of a later obliterated video

tape of the confrontation--far too salient to justify reliance on

any of their testimony.

     Third, I credit the testimony of the officers, other than

Detective Grundy, to the extent that none of them testified to

seeing any sufficiently suspicious movements2 by the defendant

which could justify a pat down.     In this connection, I have

considered the unlikelihood that any observations supporting

particularized suspicion the defendant was armed and dangerous

would have passed the notice of the other officers present or



     2
       I do not find O’Neill’s observation of the defendant’s
arms going “down towards his waist” suspicious or inconsistent
with an effort to locate identification in response to police
inquiry.

                                   5
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW   Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 6 of 8



that the defendant would have undertaken potentially threatening

movements in the presence of an overwhelming armed police

presence during the confrontation.

                       II. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

     The ground upon which I allow the motion to suppress is that

Detective Grundy lacked sufficient justification in believing

that Benjamin was armed and dangerous to the officers or others

when he initiated the pat search. To be sure, the police were

justified in approaching Benjamin and asking questions. And even

if the encounter in the cramped package store may be

characterized as a stop, I am prepared to conclude that there was

sufficient particularized suspicion, albeit just barely, that

Benjamin might have been Texeira, an individual subject to

arrest; consequently the police were authorized under Terry v.

Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), to detain Benjamin briefly to

investigate the question of identification further.          Adams v.

Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146 (1972).       But the subsequent decision

to pat Benjamin down did not have any justifiable basis.

     In order to justify even a limited pat down search, a police

officer “must be able to point to particular facts from which he

reasonably inferred that the individual was armed and dangerous.”

Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 64 (1968).        As my findings of

fact make clear, I have concluded that at the time the pat frisk

took place, Detective Grundy had no such proper basis for an


                                   6
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW    Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 7 of 8



inference of dangerousness.      Moreover, the mere potential for

execution of an arrest warrant does not create “a case where the

police had reason to suspect the presence of firearms based on

the type of crime suspected.” United States v. Lott, 870 F.2d

778, 785 (1st Cir. 1989).      I decline to “[e]xtend[] Terry

[effectively to] adopt, as a practical matter, an automatic frisk

rule” for any person who cannot immediately satisfy a police

officer regarding his identity.      United States v. McKoy, 402

F.Supp.2d 311, 317 (D.Mass. 2004), aff’d 428 F.3d 38 (1st Cir.

2005).

     For these reasons, I restate, after completed consideration,

my grant of the defendant’s motion to suppress the weapon seized

in the unconstitutional search of his person during the pat down

on December 16, 2004.       The docket shall reflect vacation of the

original January 16, 2007 grant of the motion to suppress

followed by its reinstatement on this date to assure the

government the opportunity to exercise its right of review.             In

accordance with the scheduling order entered February 1, 2007 the

Government shall have 30 days from the entry of this Memorandum

and Order on the docket to notice any appeal.3         Pending

     3
       In response to the government’s request for a status
conference regarding the motion to suppress, I provided a bare
endorsement of allowance of the motion subject to a memorandum to
follow. In order, however, to afford the government an
opportunity to consider the memorandum ultimately issued, I
informed the parties that I would renter the grant of the motion
in a fashion that would permit the government the customary time

                                    7
   Case 1:05-cr-10059-DPW   Document 47   Filed 05/10/2007   Page 8 of 8



consideration of appeal, requests for modifications of detention

may be addressed in the first instance to Magistrate Judge Dein

for disposition in light of this Memorandum and Order.


                                 /s/ Douglas P. Woodlock


                                 ____________________________
                                 DOUGLAS P. WOODLOCK
                                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




to consider appeal.

                                   8
