     Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL       Document 34        Filed 05/03/2006       Page 1 of 9



                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                          DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                                                   Criminal No. 05-CR-10094
                    v.

JEROME PENROSE



                 DEFENDANT’S SENTENCING MEMORANDUM
                 AND REQUEST FOR DOWNWARD DEPARTURE

         Defendant Jerome Penrose submits this memorandum in support of his position

that this Court should depart from the applicable advisory guideline range pursuant to

U.S.S.G. § 4A1.3(b), 18 U.S.C. § 3553 and the Supreme Court’s decisions in United

States v. Booker, 453 U.S. 220 (2005). Mr. Penrose respectfully submits that his

criminal record, the abuse and neglect he was subjected to as a child and young adult, his

cooperation with the government, and his immigration status render a sentence of thirty-

six months an appropriate one. Moreover, since Mr. Penrose is indigent, the defense

requests that the Court waive any fine.

I.       INTRODUCTION

         A)     PROCEDURAL HISTORY

         On March 28, 2005, Jerome Penrose was taken into federal custody. Mr. Penrose

has been detained since that time and was indicted on April 6, 2005 under 18 U.S.C.

§ 922(a) for two counts of felon in possession of a firearm and one count of a felon in

possession of a firearm and ammunition.
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL          Document 34        Filed 05/03/2006      Page 2 of 9



       Mr. Penrose pled guilty to these charges on January 30, 2006. At the time of his

sentencing on May 8, 2006, Mr. Penrose will have served approximately fourteen months

in prison.

       B)      STATEMENT OF THE OFFENSE

       These offenses occurred on January 10, 2005, January 27, 2005, and February 8,

2005. On those dates, Mr. Penrose accepted calls from an individual who was working as

a government informant. This individual inquired of Mr. Penrose whether he could get

firearms for him and a friend (an undercover ATF agent). Mr. Penrose stated that he had

none but would see what he could do. He returned the call stating that he had found a

supplier and could get a gun. Mr. Penrose then met and delivered the firearm to the ATF

agent. This same basic chronology occurred on those three dates and three firearms were

purchased by the ATF agent. Mr. Penrose acted as a middleman in these offenses. The

only customer Mr. Penrose sold firearms to was the undercover agent in this case.

II.    THE COURT SHOULD DEPART FROM THE ADVISORY
       GUIDELINES BECAUSE CRIMINAL HISTORY
       CATEGORY IV SUBSTANTIALLY OVER-REPRESENTS
       THE SERIOUSNESS OF MR. PENROSE’S CRIMINAL
       HISTORY

       A)      THE GUIDELINES ARE ADVISORY AND NOT PRESUMPTIVELY
               REASONABLE.

       Since Booker, courts have struggled to clarify the role that the sentencing

guidelines play in a defendant’s sentencing. See Booker, 453 U.S. 220; United States v.

Jimenez-Beltre, 440 F.3d 514 (1st Cir. 2006), United States v. Fernandez, 443 F.3d 19

(2nd Cir. 2006). The First Circuit has interpreted Booker to hold that a sentence must be

“reasonable” and a sentence within the guideline range should not be presumed

reasonable. See Jimenez-Beltre, 440 F.3d at 518.



                                            2
     Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL             Document 34           Filed 05/03/2006           Page 3 of 9



         Rather, the Jimenez-Beltre Court held that “the guidelines are still generalizations

that can point to outcomes that may appear unreasonable to sentencing judges in

particular cases.” See id.. This is such a case. Currently, Probation has calculated

Mr. Penrose to be in Category IV. With an offense level of 23,1/ he is facing 70-87

months (5 years, 10 months to 7 years, 3 months). See PSR ¶96. This calculation greatly

over-represents Mr. Penrose’s criminal history. Therefore, he respectfully asks this court

to sentence him below the guideline range in accordance with Jimenez-Baltre and

U.S.S.G. §4A1.3(b).

         B)      MR. PENROSE’S CRIMINAL HISTORY CATEGORY OVERSTATES HIS
                 HISTORY.

         §4A1.3(b) states that “[i]f reliable information indicates that the defendant’s

criminal history category substantially over-represents the seriousness of the defendant’s

criminal history or the likelihood that the defendant will commit other crimes” a

downward departure is warranted. U.S.S.G. §4A1.3(b). Here, there is a clear over-

representation of the defendant’s criminal history which needs to be corrected through a

downward departure from the advisory guidelines.

                 1)       PRIOR CONVICTIONS

         Mr. Penrose’s two prior convictions are for domestic assault and battery involving

his girlfriend, Tara Muise. Mr. Penrose does not deny the offenses which led to his




1/
        Mr. Penrose, the U.S. Attorney’s Office, and the U.S. Probation Office all agree that Mr.
Penrose’s offense level is 23. See Plea Agreement, p. 2; PSR, p. 4.



                                                    3
     Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL             Document 34            Filed 05/03/2006          Page 4 of 9



convictions for assault and battery involving Ms. Muise.2/ There are, however, mitigating

facts that this Court should consider.

         Ms. Muise and Mr. Penrose have been dating since January of 2001. At that time,

both were twenty years old. Due to their immaturity and admitted “anger issues,” they

would often fight over many inconsequential matters, and sometimes these quarrels

would escalate into a physical confrontation. See PSR, ¶66. Both Mr. Penrose and

Ms. Muise admit to these past problems but are committed to each other and to their son,

Jayden. See id. In addition, Mr. Penrose has completed a year-long anger management

class and has asked for further counseling. See PSR, ¶63. Ms. Muise is also in

counseling once a week, in part for her anger issues. Both feel that this counseling has

helped both of them handle their anger better and has lead to a much more mature

relationship.

         Ms. Muise is extremely supportive of the defendant and states that he is a good

person with a good heart who was easily misled by bad influences around him. See PSR

¶65. Ms. Muise also states that Mr. Penrose is a good father. See id. In fact, because

Ms. Muise worked full time, Mr. Penrose would often care for their son, Jayden (who is

now 4) and her son, Christian (who is now 8). See PSR, Defendant’s Objection ¶51

(accepted by Probation). Ms. Muise is committed to this relationship and plans on

moving to Jamaica with Mr. Penrose and her two children, Jayden and Christian. See

PSR, ¶65.




2/
          According to the PSR, Mr. Penrose’s prior convictions for assault and battery in 2001 and assault
and battery/threatening in 2002 would yield 5 criminal history category points under U.S.S.G §4A1.1(d).
See PSR, ¶ 36.


                                                     4
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL          Document 34         Filed 05/03/2006      Page 5 of 9



                 2)    “PROBATION”

        In addition, two criminal history category points have been added due to Mr.

Penrose’s nominal status of “probation” in Lynn District Court. Mr. Penrose was on

probation solely because he was unable to pay a fine and fees imposed by that court.

Therefore, it is an overstatement to say that Mr. Penrose was under a “criminal justice

sentence” as intended under this provision of the Guidelines. In fact, the First Circuit has

intimated that the constitutional concerns raised in Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S. 660

(1983), could be implicated in this situation. See United States v. Prezioso, 989 F.2d 52,

54 (1st Cir. 1993)(adding two criminal history category points under §4A1.1 because the

defendant’s fine was not yet due and therefore the defendant was still subject to a

criminal justice sentence). In Bearden, the Supreme Court held that a defendant could

not be imprisoned if he lacked the resources to pay a fine imposed by the court. These

constitutional concerns are present in this case since Penrose is indisputably indigent and

he was on probation solely due to this fact. He should not be punished for this inability

to pay a fine.

III.    MR. PENROSE’S SENTENCE SHOULD BE DECREASED
        FROM THE ADVISORY GUIDELINES UNDER § 3553

        A)       PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS AND BACKGROUND

        Mr. Penrose is a twenty-six year old Jamaican man. To call his life difficult and

complex would be a gross understatement. Mr. Penrose was born on February 26, 1980

in Jamaica to Angela Fletcher and Neville Penrose. Soon after Mr. Penrose’s birth, his

father moved to Florida from Jamaica without his family. Throughout his childhood, Mr.

Penrose had no real relationship with his father. Mr. Penrose’s mother struggled to try to

provide for Mr. Penrose and his seven half-siblings. They lived in a tiny apartment in an



                                             5
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL          Document 34        Filed 05/03/2006      Page 6 of 9



extremely dangerous area of Kingston. Many times Ms. Fletcher had to protect her

young children from gunfights in the street. Mr. Penrose recalls that more than once

gunmen entered their shabby home to hide from the police. The city proved to be too

much for Ms. Fletcher and she moved to the country with her eight children when Mr.

Penrose was about four years old. They moved to a small shack in a rural section of

Jamaica outside of Kingston. There, the family continued their struggle to survive. They

had no money and would oftentimes go hungry. Mr. Penrose would try to help his

mother by picking fruit from local trees or performing odd jobs for food for his younger

half-siblings.

       By the time Mr. Penrose was ten years old, he was addicted to marijuana (which

is legal in Jamaica) and began to skip school frequently. This continued for a few years

and when Mr. Penrose was approximately thirteen years old, his paternal aunt expressed

her desire to have Mr. Penrose live with her in Kingston so she could straighten him out.

Mr. Penrose’s mother, relieved to have one less mouth to feed, sent Mr. Penrose to

Kingston with his aunt. His aunt both verbally and physically abused him. He frequently

tried to tell his mother about the abuse but she did not believe him. Mr. Penrose was

forced to suffer in this abusive environment for three years. Finally when he was sixteen

years old, Mr. Penrose ran away from his aunt and went back to his mother. When he

arrived, Mr. Penrose’s mother took a bus to Kingston to find out the truth about the

alleged abuse from Mr. Penrose’s aunt. When she arrived however she was notified by a

neighbor that Mr. Penrose’s aunt had gone to America suddenly; but, the neighbors

confirmed that they had heard the beatings Mr. Penrose would often receive. Mr.




                                            6
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL          Document 34         Filed 05/03/2006       Page 7 of 9



Penrose’s story was finally confirmed but the damage from those years of physical and

mental abuse continued to haunt him.

       Eventually, Mr. Penrose stopped going to school altogether. He would smoke

marijuana all day. He had no supervision and no adult controls on his activities.

       In 1998, when Mr. Penrose was eighteen, he came to America. He hoped to get a

job and send money home to his mother and half-siblings. Finding a job proved more

difficult than he expected. When he arrived in the United States, Mr. Penrose could not

read or write and was addicted to marijuana. It was difficult but he did manage to find

work at Boston Market where he worked from 1999 through 2001. In 2001, Mr. Penrose

met Ms. Muise and their relationship began. As stated by Ms. Muise, Mr. Penrose was a

good father during this time to their son, Jayden, and Ms. Muise’s son from a prior

relationship, Christian. See PSR, ¶ 65. In addition, Mr. Penrose often cared for the

children since Ms. Muise worked full time. See PSR, Defendant’s Objections ¶51

(accepted by Probation).

       Mr. Penrose readily admits that he has made mistakes in the past. He has

accepted responsibility for his actions by pleading guilty and recognizes that he is fully

accountable for his actions. Mr. Penrose never wants to be away from his children again;

he sees them as his future and wants them to get a good education and be successful. He

sees his future as one free from crime and one where he, Ms. Muise, Jayden and Christian

live together in Jamaica. He looks forward to learning to read and write once in a federal

facility so he can obtain permanent employment and start fresh with his new family.




                                             7
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL          Document 34        Filed 05/03/2006      Page 8 of 9



       B)      MR. PENROSE’S PARTICIPATION IN THE INSTANT OFFENSE WAS
               UNCHARACTERISTIC.

       Mr. Penrose does not seek to minimize his participation in the offenses to which

he pled guilty. However, Mr. Penrose would like to point out to the court that these were

his only offenses involving any type of firearm. In addition, the evidence shows that he

was a low-level one time conduit in this type of transaction.

       C)      MR. PENROSE COOPERATED WITH THE GOVERNMENT.

       Prior to his guilty plea, on August 18, 2006, Mr. Penrose met with the

Government. Mr. Penrose attempted to assist them in solving other crimes, including

murder. In addition, Mr. Penrose gave a full and complete statement regarding these

offenses including the supplier of the guns. Though the information he provided was

indisputably useful and truthful, no arrests or prosecutions could be made in connection

with this information and therefore, the Government refused to file a substantial

assistance motion under U.S.S.G. §5K1.1(a)(2).

       D)      MR. PENROSE IS A GOOD PARENT TO HIS YOUNG SONS WHO WILL
               SUFFER THE LONGER HE IS INCARCERATED.

       Jayden and Christian miss their father. Instead of being able to play or hug their

father, they instead look forward to Mr. Penrose’s call every night and are upset when

they are not able to speak to him. Mr. Penrose is a loving parent who considers his

children his future and is excited to live with them and Ms. Muise when he is released.

       E)      THERE IS NO RISK MR. PENROSE WILL RECIDIVATE.

       Mr. Penrose realizes the mistakes he has made in the past regarding his

relationship with Ms. Muise and he has accepted responsibility for those actions. He has

worked on his anger management issues and hopes to continue to work on these problems




                                             8
  Case 1:05-cr-10094-RCL           Document 34         Filed 05/03/2006      Page 9 of 9



when he is in a federal facility. He and Ms. Muise have established a more mature

relationship and are confident in their future together. See PSR, ¶65.

        Mr. Penrose also accepts responsibility for his actions in the instant offenses.

These offenses were atypical for Mr. Penrose and therefore it is clear that Mr. Penrose

will not engage in criminal behavior in the future. In addition, Mr. Penrose will not put

himself in any position where he could be without his family again.

III.    CONCLUSION

        As seen from the information provided above, Mr. Penrose’s sentence should be

reduced from the guideline range. In support of this conclusion, Mr. Penrose respectfully

submits that this Court consider the following facts: Criminal History Category IV

overstates his criminal history which consists of two domestic assault and batteries

involving Ms. Muise who is committed to him and their future together; looking at the

§3553 factors, this court should take into consideration Mr. Penrose’s abusive childhood,

his lack of a father figure in his life, his cooperation with the Government and his total

commitment to his family. Considering all these factors, this Court should reduce Mr.

Penrose’s sentence to thirty-six months.

                                              Respectfully submitted,
                                              JEROME PENROSE
                                              By his attorneys,

                                              __/s/ Jessica C. Lowney________
                                              Tracy A. Miner (BBO #547137)
                                              Jessica C. Lowney (BBO #655758)
                                              Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris,
                                                 Glovsky and Popeo, P.C.
                                              One Financial Center
                                              Boston, MA 02111
                                              (617) 542-6000

        Dated: May 3, 2006



                                              9
LIT 1571349v.1
