     Case 1:05-cr-10152-DPW         Document 20        Filed 01/12/2006      Page 1 of 4



                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                          DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                  )
                                           )
             v.                            )       CRIMINAL NO.05-10152-DPW
                                           )
RAUL RIOS                                  )




                             PROCEDURAL ORDER
                      RE: PRE-PLEA PRESENTENCE REPORT


WOODLOCK, D.J.


      In accordance with this Court's allowance of Defendant's Motion for Pre-Plea
Presentence Report on JANUARY 12, 2006, it is hereby ORDERED:
Pre-sentence Investigation
      1.     a)     The United States Probation Office shall commence immediately the pre-
             sentence investigation unless as provided in Fed. R. Crim. Pro. Rule 32(c), the
             court finds under Rule 32(b)(1)(A) and (B) that the information in the record
             enables it to exercise its sentencing authority meaningfully under 18 U.S.C. §
             3553 and the court explains this finding on the record.
             b)     The Probation Office shall prepare pre-sentence investigation reports in
             the order in which the requests from the court are received.


Statement of Relevant Facts
      2.     Not later than JANUARY 19, 2006, the attorney for the government shall provide
             to the United States Probation Office a statement of relevant facts and any other
             documents pertinent under Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 32(b) (4) and
             shall simultaneously serve on counsel for the defendant a copy of everything
             provided to the Probation Office.
     Case 1:05-cr-10152-DPW           Document 20        Filed 01/12/2006       Page 2 of 4



Interview of Defendant
       3.     The Probation Office shall provide a reasonable opportunity for defense counsel
              to attend any interview of the defendant conducted by a probation officer during
              the pre-sentence investigation.
              a)     If the case is resolved by a plea, and the Probation Office has timely
              notification of the plea, it shall hold an interview with the defendant on the day of
              the plea. If an interview cannot be held on the day of the plea, the Probation
              Office shall schedule an interview to be held within seven days after the plea or
              within such additional time as the court may order.
              b)     If the case is resolved by a verdict, the Probation Office shall schedule an
              interview with the defendant to be held within seven days after the verdict or
              within such additional period of time as the court may order.
              c)     If the defendant is in custody, the United States Marshal shall, at the
              request of the Probation Office, bring the defendant to the courthouse for an
              interview at the earliest feasible time.


Pretrial Services Responsibility
       4.     Pretrial Services shall provide to the Probation Office all documents in the
              possession of Pretrial Services that may be relevant to the pre-sentence
              investigation, including a copy of the Pretrial Report, the defendant’s state, local,
              and national criminal record, police reports, copies of convictions, drug test
              results, reports of incidents, and other reports and supporting documents.


Date of Change of Plea and Sentencing
       5.     The Change of Plea and Sentencing hearing is scheduled to occur at 3:30 P.M.
              on APRIL 6, 2006, in courtroom 1 on the 3rd floor. This date is to be not sooner
              than ten weeks after the date of the this order, in order to permit the following:




                                                -2-
    Case 1:05-cr-10152-DPW          Document 20         Filed 01/12/2006      Page 3 of 4



            a)     Probation Office shall have five weeks after the date of this order for the
            preparation and disclosure of the initial report.
            b)     Probation Office shall disclose the initial report to defense counsel and
            government counsel by 12:00 noon on MARCH 2, 2006, unless the defendant
            expressly waives the minimum five week pre-sentencing notification period.
            c)     The date when disclosure has been effected to each attorney is the date of
            the mailing of a copy to that attorney. An attorney may, in lieu of receiving
            disclosure by mail, make arrangements with the Probation Office to pick up the
            report no later than 3:00 p.m. on the date disclosure is due. It is the responsibility
            of the defense counsel to disclose the pre-sentence report to the defendant and to
            discuss it with and explain it to the defendant.


Objections Procedure
      6.    By 12:00 noon on MARCH 16, 2006, attorneys for the government and the
            defendant shall advise the probation officer and each other in writing, of any
            objections they may have as to any material information, sentencing
            classifications, sentencing guideline ranges, or policy statements contained in or
            omitted from the report.


      7.    The probation officer shall conduct any further investigation and make any
            revisions to the pre-sentence report that may be necessary. The probation officer
            may require counsel for both parties to confer with the probation officer to
            identify and attempt to resolve any factual or legal disputes which may require
            hearing by the court.




                                             -3-
     Case 1:05-cr-10152-DPW          Document 20         Filed 01/12/2006       Page 4 of 4



Final Pre-sentence Report
      8.     By 12:00 noon on MARCH 30 2006, the probation officer shall submit to the
             court and disclose to the attorneys the final pre-sentence report, including any
             addendum, setting forth the unresolved objections, the grounds for these
             objections and the probation officer’s comments on the objections. The probation
             officer shall certify that the contents of the report, including any revisions, and the
             addendum have been disclosed to the defendant and to counsel for the defendant
             and the government, and that the addendum fairly states any remaining
             unresolved objections. Except with regard to any unresolved objections, the
             report of the pre-sentence investigation may be accepted by the court as accurate.
             The court, however, for good cause shown, may allow a new objection to the pre-
             sentence report to be raised at any time before the imposition of sentence.


      9.     The schedule set forth in this order may be modified by the court for good cause
             shown.


      11.    Disclosure of the pre-sentence report is made under the provisions of Rule 32,
             Fed. R. Crim.Pro., except that the Probation Office shall not disclose any
             recommendation it made to the court as to sentence. Any such recommendation
             made to the court by the Probation Office must not contain factual information
             not already disclosed to both counsel and to the defendant.


      12.    Unless any party files an objection, the time period from JANUARY 12, 2006 to
             APRIL 6, 2006 will be deemed by the Court as excludable in the interest of
             justice under the Speedy Trial Act.

      January 12, 2006                              /s/ Michelle Rynne
      DATE                                          Deputy Clerk




                                              -4-
