 

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 1 of6

lLS.DeparnnentofJusdce

Michael J. Sullivan
Um`rea’ States Attorney
District ofMassachusettS

 

Main Reception: (617) 748-3100 Jahn Joseph Moakley Um`ted States Courthouse
I Courthause Way
Suite 9200
Boston. Massachusetrs 02210

July 7, 2006

Oscar Cruz, Esg.

Assistant Federal Defender

United States Federal Defenders Office
408 Atlantic Avenue

Boston, MA OleO

 

Re: Jayson A. Paradise
Criminal No. OE-lOlQT-MLW

Dear Mr. Cruz:

This letter sets forth the Agreement between the United
States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts ("the U.S.
Attorney") and your client, Jayson A. Paradise ("Defendant"), in
the above-captioned case. The Agreement is as follows:

l. Change of Plea

At the earliest practicable date, Defendant shall plead
guilty to the above-numbered one-count Indictment. Defendant
expressly and unequivocally admits that he in fact committed the

crime charged in the Indictment, and is in fact guilty of that
offense.

2. Penalties

Defendant faces the following minimum mandatory and maximum
penalties: a minimum term of incarceration of 15 years and a
maximum term of life; a five-year period of supervised release; a

$250,000 fine; and, a $lOO mandatory special assessment.

3. Sentencing Guidelines

The parties agree to jointly take the following positions at
sentencing under the United States Sentencing Guidelines:

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 2 of 6

' Defendant’s base offense level is 33, pursuant to
U.S.S.G. § 4Bl.4(b)(3)(B).

° No other enhancements apply.

' Defendant’s total offense level, prior to any

reduction for acceptance of responsibility, is
therefore 33.

The U.S. Attorney's agreement that the disposition set forth
below is appropriate in this case is based, in part, on
Defendant’s prompt acceptance of personal responsibility for the
offense of conviction in this case.

The U.S. Attorney specifically may, at his sole option, be
released from his commitments under this Agreement, including,
but not limited to, his agreement that paragraph 4 constitutes
the appropriate disposition of this case, if at any time between
his execution of this Agreement and sentencing Defendant:

(a) Fails to admit a complete factual basis for the
plea;

(b) Fails to truthfully admit his conduct in the
offenses of conviction;

(c) Falsely denies, or frivolously contests, relevant
conduct for which Defendant is accountable under
U.S.S.G. § lBl.3;

(d) Fails to provide truthful information about his
financial status;

(e) Gives false or misleading testimony in any
proceeding relating to the criminal conduct
charged in this case and any relevant conduct for
which Defendant is accountable under U.S.S.G. §
1B1.3;

(f) Engages in acts which form a basis for finding
that Defendant has obstructed or impeded the
administration of justice under U.S.S.G. § 3Cl.l;

(g) Intentionally fails to appear in Court or violates
any condition of release;

(h) Commits a crime;

(i) Transfers any asset protected under any provision

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 3 of 6

` of this Agreement; and/or
(j) Attempts to withdraw his guilty plea.

Defendant expressly understands that he may not withdraw his
plea of guilty unless the Court rejects this Agreement under Fed.
R. Crim. P. ll(c)(B).

4. Aqreed Disposition

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree pursuant to Fed, R.
Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C) that the following is the appropriate
disposition of this case:

(a) A sentence of incarceration of 190 months;

(b) A fine at the low end of the applicable guideline
range,r unless the Court finds that Defendant is
not able and, even with the use of a reasonable
installment schedule, is not likely to become able
to pay a fine;

(c) A $lOO mandatory special assessment;
(d) A five-year period of supervised release.

The U.S. Attorney and Defendant agree that there is no basis
for a departure from the sentencing range established by the
United States Sentencing Guidelines, except as explicitly
described in paragraph 3, above.

5. Pavment of Mandatory Special Assessment

Defendant agrees to pay the mandatory special assessment to
the Clerk of the Court on or before the date of sentencing,
unless Defendant establishes to the satisfaction of the Court
that Defendant is financially unable to do so.

6. Probation Department Not Bound Bv Agreement

The sentencing disposition agreed upon by the parties and
their respective calculations under the Sentencing Guidelines are
not binding upon the United States Probation Office. Defendant's
plea will be tendered pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. ll(c)(l)(C).
Defendant cannot withdraw his plea of guilty unless the
sentencing judge rejects this Agreement. If the sentencing judge
rejects this Agreement, this Agreement shall be null and void at

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 4 of 6

the option either of the United States or Defendant. ln this
regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense to any charges which
he might otherwise have under any statute of limitations or the
Speedy Trial Act.

7. Information For Presentence Report

Defendant agrees to provide all information requested by the
U.S. Probation Office concerning his assets.

8. Civil Liability

By entering into this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney does not
compromise any civil liability, including but not limited to any
tax liability, which Defendant may have incurred or may incur as
a result of his conduct and his plea of guilty to the charges
specified in paragraph one of this Agreement.

9. Withdrawal of Plea By Defendant

Should Defendant move to withdraw his guilty lea at any
time, this Agreement shall be null and void at the option of the
U.S. Attorney.

10. Breach of Agreement

If the U.S. Attorney determines that Defendant has failed to
comply with any provision of this Agreement, has violated any
condition of his pretrial release, or has committed any crime
following his execution of this Agreement, the U.S. Attorney may,
at his sole option, be released from his commitments under this
Agreement in their entirety by notifying Defendant, through
counsel or otherwise, in writing. The U.S. Attorney may also
pursue all remedies available to him under the law, irrespective
of whether he elects to be released from his commitments under
this Agreement. Further, the U.S. Attorney may pursue any and
all charges which have been, or are to be, dismissed pursuant to
this Agreement. Defendant recognizes that no such breach by him
of an obligation under this Agreement shall give rise to grounds
for withdrawal of his guilty plea. Defendant understands thatr
should he breach any provision of this agreement, the U.S.
Attorney will have the right to use against Defendant before any
grand jury, at any trial or hearing, or for sentencing purposes,
any statements which may be made by him, and any information,
materials, documents or objects which may be provided by him to
the government subsequent to this Agreement, without any
limitation. In this regard, Defendant hereby waives any defense
to any charges which he might otherwise have under any statute of

 

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 5 of 6

limitations or the Speedy Trial Act.
ll. Who ls Bound Bv,Agreement

This Agreement is limited to the U.S. Attorney for the
District of Massachusetts, and cannot and does not bind the
Attorney General of the United States or any other federal, state
or local prosecutive authorities.

12. Complete Agreement

This letter contains the complete agreement between the
parties. No promises, representations or agreements have been
made other than those set forth in this letter. This Agreement
supersedes prior understandings, if any, of the parties, whether
written or oral. This Agreement can be modified or supplemented
only in a written memorandum signed by the parties or on the
record in court.

If this letter accurately reflects the Agreement between the
U.S. Attorney and Defendant, please have Defendant sign the
Acknowledgment of Agreement below. Please also sign below as
Witness. Return the original of this letter to Assistant U.S.
Attorney James Lang.

Very truly yours,

MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN

Uni§;:}::::::;httorney
By: F<: F

LAURA J. KAPLAN, Chief
Violent & Organized Crime
Section

   
   

As istant U.S. Attorney

Case 1:05-cr-10197-|\/|LW Document 26 Filed 09/28/2006 Page 6 of 6

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PLEA AGREEMENT

l have read this letter in its entirety and discussed it
with my attorney. l hereby acknowledge that it fully sets forth
my agreement with the United States Attorney's Office for the
District of Massachusetts. l further state that no additional
promises or representations have been made to me by any official
of the United States in connection with this matter. l understand
the crimes to which I have agreed to plead guilty, the maximum
penalties for those offenses and Sentencing Guideline penalties
potentially applicable to them. l am satisfied with the legal
representation provided to me by my attorney. We have had
sufficient time to meet and discuss my case. We have discussed
the charges against me, possible defenses l might have, the terms
of this Plea Agreement and whether l should go to trial. l am
entering into this Agreement freely, voluntarily, and knowingly
because I am guilty of the offenses to which l am pleading guilty
and l believe this Agreement is in my best interest.

    
  

  

A.

  

PARADISE

Defendant

Date: C]//J/OG

I certify that JAYSON A. PARADISE has read this Agreement
and that we have discussed its meaning. l believe he understands
the Agreement and is entering into the Agreement freely,
voluntarily and knowingly.

/Q!¢/-
SCAR CRUZ E Q
Attorney f r fendant

Date: C?//"//O(Q

 

