   Case 1:05-cr-10239-RCL   Document 302   Filed 05/11/2007   Page 1 of 3



                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA          )
                                  )
     v.                           )   Crim No.05-010239
                                  )
JERMAINE GILMORE                  )

   MOTION FOR LEAVE TO JOIN GREGORY BING’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS
         FRUITS OF UNLAWFUL ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE AND
               MEMORANDUM OF POINTS AND AUTHORITIES


     Now Comes defendant, Jermaine Gilmore, who respectfully

moves this Court to grant him leave to join Mr. Bing’s above

entitled motion and memorandum in support to suppress Title III

intercepts.    In support of this request defendant states the

following:

     1.    Mr. Gilmore has standing as his telephone calls were

intercepted by the government when he called the target

telephones subscribed to by Gregory Bing during the pendency of

the authorized intercepts.     These calls generally occurred

between April and May 2005.

     2.    The telephones that Mr. Gilmore called were, as stated

above, identified as targets by the affiant for the authorizing

warrant.    These telephones were subscribed to by co-defendant

Gregory Bing.

     3.    The legal issues arising from the illegal interception

of Mr. Bing’s telephone calls are sufficiently similar to Mr.

Gilmore’s constitutional claims that it would be inefficient use

of judicial resources for Mr. Gilmore to file a separate motion

to suppress.
   Case 1:05-cr-10239-RCL   Document 302   Filed 05/11/2007   Page 2 of 3



     4.    Therefore, Mr. Gilmore seeks to join Mr. Bing’s motion

and moves this Court to suppress his intercepted conversations

for the reasons identified in Mr. Bing’s motion and memorandum of

support.

     5.    Mr. Gilmore also seeks to file this motion late.          In

support, defendant states that his counsel was tied up preparing

for a month long criminal trial scheduled to start before Judge

Saris on April 30th.   While the case did begin as planned, the

parties were able to resolve the case after jury selection.

Counsel has been attending to a back log of legal matters ever

since.    See Affidavit of James Budreau attached hereto.

     Wherefore, defendant seeks leave to join Mr. Bing’s Motion

to Suppress Fruits of Unlawful Electronic Surveillance And

Memorandum Of Points And Authorities and to suppress said

electronic surveillance.


                                  Respectfully submitted,
                                  By his Attorney


                                   /S/ JAMES BUDREAU
                                  JAMES H. BUDREAU, ESQ.
                                  BBO#553391
                                  20 Park Plaza, Suite 905
                                  Boston, MA 02112
                                  (617) 227-3700

     I hereby certify that I served a copy of the above motion
through the ECF system which was sent electronically to the
registered participants as identified on the Notice of Electronic
Filing (NEF) and paper copies will be sent to those indicated as
non registered participants on the 11th day of May 2007.

                                  /s/ James Budreau

                                    2
     Case 1:05-cr-10239-RCL         Document 302         Filed 05/11/2007      Page 3 of 3




                             AFFIDAVIT OF JAMES BUDREAU

       I, James Budreau, state and depose to the best of my recollection and knowledge that:

       1. I represent Jermaine Gilmore and was appointed through the Criminal Justice Act.

        2. I have reviewed Mr. Bing’s Motion to Suppress Fruits of Unlawful Electronic
Surveillance And Memorandum Of Points And Authorities and concluded that the issues raised
in that motion equally apply to Mr. Gilmore.

       3. Mr. Gilmore was intercepted numerous times during a two month period by the
government while calling Mr. Bing on a target telephone(s). These phones were possessed by or
subscribed to by Mr. Bing.

       4. Mr. Gilmore has standing to challenge these intercepts.

       5. Counsel for Mr. Gilmore did not file a motion to suppress earlier given that he had
preparing for trial before Judge Saris which began on April 30, 2007. While the case settled on
May 2, 2007, the preparation for this case consumed counsel given that it was expected to last a
month and involved a complex indictment alleging mail fraud and massive tax fraud over ten
years by defendants who owned multiple corporations. I have been attending to a backlog of
cases ever since this case resolved.

       Signed under pains and penalties of perjury,


                                     /S/JAMES BUDREAU




                                                3
