         Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22          Filed 01/21/10 Page 1 of 10



                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               DISTRICT OF MAINE



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,               )
                                        )
                     Plaintiff,         )
                                        )
                                                  Criminal No. 09-184-B-W
               v.                       )
                                        )
BENJAMIN SMALL,                         )
                                        )
                     Defendant.         )


             DEFENDANT’S REPLY TO GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO
                     MOTION TO DISMISS INDICTMENT

        Defendant, by and through his undersigned attorney, submits this reply to the

Government’s response (Document # 15) to his Motion to Dismiss Indictment (Document

#10).

        Mr. Small moved to dismiss on two grounds: That the deprivation of his right to

bear arms pursuant to the Second Amendment does not withstand either strict or

intermediate scrutiny, and that the method in which the First Circuit has construed the

term “commitment” in 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4) renders that statute unconstitutional

pursuant to the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.

        A.     Section 922(g)(4) violates the Due Process Clause as construed by the

First Circuit:

        The Government begins the discussion of Mr. Small’s Due Process challenge to §

922(g)(4) by misconstruing it as a challenge to the procedures set forth in 34-B M.R.S.A.

§ 3863. That is not the challenge Mr. Small makes. He is not challenging his emergency

admission. His is not challenging the State of Maine’s ability to have performed that

emergency admission. He is not even challenging the First Circuit’s decision that such an
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22             Filed 01/21/10 Page 2 of 10



emergency admission constitutes a “commitment” within the meaning of § 922(g)(4).

Rather, he is moving to dismiss the Indictment because, once the term “commitment” is

defined as an emergency admission under 34-B M.R.S.A. § 3863, rather than the

commitment proceedings set forth in 34-B M.R.S.A. § 3864, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4)

become unconstitutional as so construed and applied. Because the First Circuit has not

answered the question as to whether application of this statute in this manner violates the

Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, the issue is one of first impression.

       The Due Process violation results in taking what is a very limited and temporary

intrusion into a person’s liberty interests, as carefully circumscribed by the limited nature

of detention under § 3863, and depriving a person permanently of a core constitutional

right based on such a proceeding. The State of Maine has not committed the Due Process

violation. The Federal Government has.

       In accord with the idea that Due Process protections are flexible depending on the

nature of the intrusion at issue, see Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481 (1972), the

State of Maine may perform a limited intrusion into Mr. Small’s custodial status in order

to determine whether he presents a danger to himself or others. This is akin to the

temporary detention based on a warrantless arrest condoned in Gerstein v. Pugh, 420

U.S. 103, 113-14 (1975)(warrantless arrest justified by fear of suspect’s flight; once

suspect is in custody, no justification exists for dispensing with neutral judicial officer’s

finding of probable cause). The State could detain Mr. Small in a mental hospital

pursuant to such procedure, but it could not permanently intrude upon his liberty interests

without either his consent, or a formal hearing before a neutral judicial officer that

otherwise complied with certain basic requirements of Due Process. See 34-B M.R.S.A.

§ 3863(5) (setting forth procedures for continued hospitalization after emergency


                                               2
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22            Filed 01/21/10 Page 3 of 10



admission). The time frame allowed for involuntary detention in a mental hospital is

three days, see id., which is similar in nature and scope to the allowable detention on a

warrantless arrest. See Gerstein, supra. The State of Maine already allows for the type of

procedures the Government argues would be too burdensome to mandate. See 34-B

M.R.S.A. § 3464. Therefore, any argument relying on an increased burden to the State or

an adverse effect on mental health care overall is specious.

       Interestingly, the constitutional challenge levied by Mr. Small was not considered

by the First Circuit in its decision in United States v. Chamberlain, 159 F.3d 656 (1 st Cir.

1998). Rather, that decision was limited to the meaning of the word “commitment” for

purposes of § 922(g)(4). The Court did not consider whether, once the emergency

admission procedure was deemed a qualifying “commitment,” Section 922(g)(4) could

remain a constitutional enactment given the procedural limitations on long-term

deprivation of liberties attendant upon such a “commitment.” See Addington v. Texas,

441 U.S. 418 (1979).

       The instant motion takes Chamberlain as controlling precedent. However,

Chamberlain does not answer the constitutional question posed. Therefore, Chamberlain

cannot be used to dispose of the instant motion to dismiss. Rather, the constitutional

question only arises because Chamberlain construed the federal statute in the manner in

which it did. This constitutional question does not arise in other jurisdictions that have

construed the statutory term “commitment” in a manner consistent with the Due Process

requirements set forth by the Supreme Court for a valid involuntary commitment

procedure. See e.g. United States v. Giardina, 861 F.2d 1334, 1335 (5th Cir.1988);

United States v. Hansel, 474 F.2d 1120, 1122-23 (8th Cir.1973); United States v. Waters,

23 F.3d 29 (2 nd Cir. 1994).


                                              3
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22             Filed 01/21/10 Page 4 of 10



       Because the Government fundamentally misapprehends the basis for the

Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss, it is entirely off-base in arguing that Mr. Small seeks to

change, or add any burden to, the State of Maine’s emergency admission or involuntary

commitment proceedings. The State of Maine has it right. The Chamberlain decision, by

adopting a portion of that statute that is, at most, a temporary and limited remedy and

rendering it a permanent disability, is the “fly in the soup.” Granting the instant motion

will have no effect at all on the State’s emergency admission procedures, nor its ability to

care for the mentally ill.

       Finally, the Due Process argument lodged by Mr. Small is not the Due Process

argument considered by the district court in United States v. Milheron, 231 F.Supp.2d 376

(D.Me. 2002). Mr. Milheron was not deemed to have an individual liberty interest to bear

arms under the Second Amendment. See id. at 378 (finding no individual Second

Amendment right). That legal determination has since been found to be incorrect. See

Heller v. District of Columbia, 128 S.Ct. 2783 (2008). Further, the issue answered in

Milheron was one of notice. The issue brought by Mr. Small is one of substantive Due

Process: Can a fundamental right, which includes bodily integrity not to be involuntarily

treated or indefinitely detained in a mental hospital, as well as other liberty interests (such

as one’s Second Amendment rights) be permanently deprived without following certain

procedures? The Supreme Court has answered this question in the negative. See

Addington, supra; Vitek v. Jones, 445 U.S. 480 (1980); Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.

651, 673 (1977). Milheron did not answer the substantive Due Process question because

it found no individual right that was being permanently deprived upon a statute that was

designed for a temporary and limited purpose.




                                               4
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22            Filed 01/21/10 Page 5 of 10



       Neither does the opinion in United States v. Vertz, 40 Fed.Appx. 69 (6 th Cir. 2002)

answer the question presented by Mr. Small’s motion. The Court there opined that “the

federal interpretation of the term ‘commitment’ should be so reliant on the terminology

chosen by an individual state. To accept such a proposition would be to sacrifice any hope

of a uniform application of the federal statute. Any state could expand or limit the scope

of the federal firearms statute at will by merely changing the labels they place on their

involuntary hospitalization procedures.” Id. at 74-75. Rather, Mr. Small argues that a

valid “commitment” to a mental hospital has been defined by the United States Supreme

Court, and that state laws may use whatever process they deem most desirable, as long as

those procedures ultimately comply with the Due Process requirements established for a

valid mental hospital commitment. Maine’s statutes do this. The First Circuit’s selection

of which part of those statutes qualify as a “commitment” for purposes of § 922(g)(4)

does not.

       As noted above, there are jurisdictions, such as the Second, Fifth and Eighth, that

measure what a “commitment” is, not only against a state’s definition, but also find that

only those “commitments” subject to Due Process protections outlined in Ingraham and

its progeny protections qualify as prohibitory events. Such construction of § 922(g)(4)

would comply with the Fifth Amendment. However, because the First Circuit has not so

construed § 922(g)(4), its application to Mr. Small renders the statute unconstitutional. If

the First Circuit were to construe § 922(g)(4) in the same manner as the Second, Fifth and

Eighth Circuits, this issue would not arise. However, neither would Mr. Small be subject

to the instant prosecution. Therefore, as this Court is required to accept the statutory

construction supplied by Chamberlain, it must now also apply Addington, Vitek, and

Ingraham and declare the statute unconstitutional as applied.


                                              5
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22           Filed 01/21/10 Page 6 of 10



       B.     The Government has failed to provide evidence that applying §
              922(g)(4) to those who have not been “committed” pursuant to the
              basic requirements of Due Process as outlined in Addington, Vitek, and
              Ingraham passes intermediate scrutiny necessary for depriving an
              individual of his Second Amendment rights

       Mr. Small moves to dismiss the Indictment not only on Fifth Amendment grounds,

but also on Second Amendment grounds. The Government is correct in stating that §

922(g)(4) does not preclude all those who are deemed “mentally ill” to be prohibited from

firearm possession. The Supreme Court’s shorthand reference in Heller to the “mentally

ill” may have been to those who have been subject to mental health commitments

complying with the process due under the Fifth Amendment. However, because Heller

did not involve a challenge to the application of § 922(g)(4) to those not provided such

procedural protections, it is unclear whether this reference disposes of the question. Mr.

Small argues that it does not.

       He does so based on the Seventh Circuit’s decision in United States v. Skoien, 587

F.3d 803 (7 th Cir. 2009), which involves a challenge to 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9). In

addressing this challenge, the Seventh Circuit made some useful observations. First, it

held that the statement in Heller stating that the laws disarming felons are “presumptively

lawful” does not dispose of other firearm prohibitions. See id. at 808. Instead, it

concluded that all “gun laws–other than those like the categorically invalid one in Heller

itself–must be independently justified.” Id.

       In other words, in determining how the Government can justify the prohibition at

issue, the basis for the law must be analyzed. For instance, section 922(g)(1), having

nothing to do with violence, need not establish a nexus between the nature of the prior

offense and future violence. This is because felons traditionally have been deprived of

core civil rights based on the fact of a prior conviction, whereas those convicted of


                                               6
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22             Filed 01/21/10 Page 7 of 10



misdemeanors historically have not similarly been so deprived. Regarding the mentally

ill, “[t]he state has a legitimate interest under its parens patriae powers in providing care

to its citizens who are unable because of emotional disorders to care for themselves; the

state also has authority under its police power to protect the community from the

dangerous tendencies of some who are mentally ill.” Addington, 441 U.S. at 426.

However, in so stating, defining the interest of a State, the converse also holds true that it

does not have the ability to intrude on the lives of those who are mentally ill who are able

to care for themselves or who do not suffer from dangerous tendencies due to their

illness. Therefore, the Government’s assertion that Congress could enact a disability on

all who may be deemed “mentally ill” at any time for any reason does not comply with the

limitation recognized by the Supreme Court on a government’s ability to so deprive its

citizenry of core constitutional rights.

       The Government’s citation to “horrific firearm violence in mass shootings,” Govt

Memo at 8, does not justify disarming all civilians. Heller stands for at least that much.

Society’s interest in punishing gun violence is usually addressed through statutes that

make such activity criminal. This is the essence of a government’s police power. If Mr.

Small had engaged in any conduct that could be prosecuted as criminal, other than the

status offense with which he is currently charged, then he would be subject to those laws

controlling the use of firearms. However, he is not alleged to have engaged in any

misconduct with the firearm, and there is no reason to believe he would engage in

misconduct with the firearm because there had never been any finding, by a neutral and

detached judicial officer after a hearing, that Mr. Small presents a danger due to his

mental status.




                                              7
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22             Filed 01/21/10 Page 8 of 10



       What Skoien teaches us is that, unlike those instances in which fundamental rights

are not at issue, Congress cannot rely simply on a rational basis to enact restrictions it

believes to be beneficial. However, when fundamental rights are at stake, Congress has

to exercise more care in formulating restrictions. In this instance, there has to be a “fit”

between those who are known to commit the targeted activity (violent acts) and those

who are subject to the restriction on their liberty. The Government concedes that

“certainly not all persons suffering from mental illness are inherently dangerous... .”

Govt memo at 10. Because that is true, Congress cannot disarm the mentally ill as a class,

but only those who have been found to be dangerous to themselves or others due to such

illness. The forum in which such question is addressed, in Maine, is pursuant to a hearing

held under 34-B M.S.R.A. § 3864.

       No such hearing was deemed necessary regarding Mr. Small, as he was not

deemed to be a continuing danger to himself or others. Therefore, the Government has

not established that Mr. Small falls within a class of those who are “inherently

dangerous” due to a mental illness and therefore deprived of an individual right otherwise

guaranteed pursuant to the United States Constitution. Without such a showing, any

misconduct committed by Mr. Small with a firearm should be prosecuted pursuant to laws

proscribing such conduct. If Mr. Small is convicted of a felony under the laws of the

State of Maine for his conduct, then he will be prohibited from possessing a firearm as a

felon. Where a person does not engage in such deleterious conduct, they should not be

subject to prosecution and potential punishment. Thus, absent a prior proceeding

complying with Due Process protections in which it is established that a person can be

deprived of a core constitutional right, application of § 922(g)(4) is not otherwise




                                              8
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22           Filed 01/21/10 Page 9 of 10



narrowly tailored to address the harm sought to be avoided, and therefore is

unconstitutional as applied.

                                     CONCLUSION

       For the foregoing reasons, Mr. Small requests that the Court grant his motion to

dismiss the Indictment as being brought pursuant to a statute that is unconstitutional as

applied under the Second and Fifth Amendments to the United States Constitution.

Dated: January 21, 2010

                                                 Respectfully submitted,



                                                 /s/ Virginia G. Villa

                                                 VIRGINIA G. VILLA
                                                 Assistant Federal Defender
                                                 Attorney for Defendant

                                                 Key Plaza-Second Floor
                                                 23 Water Street
                                                 Bangor, ME 04401
                                                 (207) 992-4111
                                                 Virginia.Villa@fd.org




                                             9
        Case 1:09-cr-00184-JAW Document 22                Filed 01/21/10 Page 10 of 10




                            UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                                  DISTRICT OF MAINE


                                       Certificate of Service

        I hereby certify that on January 21, 2010 I electronically filed with the Clerk of Court
using the CM/ECF system which will send notification of such filing to the following:

                               James Moore, Assistant U.S. Attorney.

/s/ Virginia G. Villa
Assistant Federal Defender




                                                 10
