                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                   DISTRICT OF MAINE


 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                       )
                                                )
 V.                                             )
                                                )   1:18-CR-00155-LEW
 RYAN D. MERRILL,                               )
                                                )
                       Defendant                )

                          DECISION AND ORDER ON
                      DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS


       On October 12, 2018, Ryan Merrill was indicted on one count of possession of an

unregistered silencer, in violation of 26 U.S.C. §§ 5841, 5861(d), and 5871, as well as one

count of possession of a silencer not identified by a serial number, in violation of 26 U.S.C.

§§ 5842, 5861(i), and 5871. Indictment (ECF No. 33). He now moves to suppress evidence

gathered from his home on July 17, 2018. Mot. to Suppress (ECF No. 49). The motion is

DENIED.

                                     BACKGROUND

       As established in the evidentiary hearing, Merrill resides at 14 Holly Hill Lane in

Augusta, Maine. On July 17, 2018, Augusta Police Officers Christopher Hutchings and

Todd Nyberg responded to reports of gunshots being fired at the residence. En route,

dispatch advised Officer Hutchings that police had been called to Merrill’s residence before

in response to Merrill firing blank ammunition. Dispatch did not provide any additional

information regarding Merrill and neither Officer Hutchings nor Nyberg checked the

Augusta Police Department’s “In House File” before responding to the call.
          Officers Hutchings and Nyberg arrived at Merrill’s trailer at nearly the same time. 1

Both were armed and in uniform. Before approaching the front door of the trailer, the

officers saw a figure—Merrill—through a large window and motioned for him to come to

the door. The officers then climbed the stairs to the deck by the front door and knocked on

the door. Officer Nyberg stood behind Officer Hutchings during the initial conversation.

          Merrill opened the door. In a relaxed tone, Officer Hutchings asked Merrill whether

he had been shooting blanks, to which Merrill responded in the affirmative. When Officer

Hutchings requested to see the gun, Merrill told Officer Hutchings that his mother had

taken the gun. When Officer Hutchings asked Merrill if he could speak with Merrill’s

mother, Merrill indicated the gun was in his residence.

          At this point, Officer Hutchings said: “I need to see the gun and I will get out of

here.” Merrill responded by stepping back from the door and stating, “Come on in.” After

a brief conversation, Merrill directed the officers’ attention to a firearm with an attached

silencer leaning against the wall in the hallway. Merrill warned that the gun was loaded

and after unloading the gun, the officers seized the weapon.

          Officer Hutchings testified that throughout the interaction, Merrill’s tone remained

“relaxed, very cooperative, [and] very understanding.” By Officer Hutchings’ account,

Merrill’s demeanor and attitude toward the two officers was “accommodating, hospitable

. . . overly friendly and very cooperative, [he] was almost happy to answer our questions.”



1
    None of the initial interaction between the parties was captured on the officers’ recording equipment. As
    stated in United States v. Coombs, this failure to utilize the recording equipment is “unfortunate” because
    “recording suspects’ interviews is a salutary way to eliminate future questions that may arise both about
    how a particular interview was conducted and about what was said.” 857 F.3d 439, 450 (1st Cir. 2017).
                                                        2
Merrill did not appear to be confused and didn’t give any indication of mental incapacity.

Merrill did ask to take anxiety medicine near the end of the encounter.

       Unbeknownst to the officers at the time of their interaction with Merrill, Merrill has

a history of mental illness. Six days prior to this interaction, Merrill was released from

Maine General Medical Center against medical advice following a two-week involuntary

commitment “for evaluation of a manic decompensation with psychotic features.” Motion

2; Def.’s Ex. 8.

                                      DISCUSSION

       Merrill argues the Augusta Police Officers violated his rights under the Fourth

Amendment by “unreasonably enter[ing] and search[ing] his home, without a warrant,

without valid consent, and without exigent circumstances.”         Motion 5.     During the

evidentiary hearing, the core of the parties’ arguments focused on Merrill’s ability to

voluntarily consent due to his mental health concerns. Upon questioning by the court at

the conclusion of evidence, the issue was more refined; to wit, that Mr. Merrill’s mental

health made him more susceptible to feeling coerced by the APD officers to agree to enter

his residence without a warrant. No claim was made that the officers’ search was warranted

by exigent circumstances.

       The Fourth Amendment guarantees the “right of the people to be secure in their

persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures.” U.S.

CONST. amend. IV. “It is a ‘basic principle of Fourth Amendment law’ that searches and

seizures inside a home without a warrant are presumptively unreasonable.” Payton v. New

York, 445 U.S. 573, 586 (1980) (quoting Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 477

                                             3
(1971)). However, a warrantless search – even of a home – is not per se unreasonable if

“proper consent” is “voluntarily given.” United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164, 165–66

(1974); Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 219 (1973) (“It is equally well settled

that one of the specifically established exceptions to the requirements of both a warrant

and probable cause is a search that is conducted pursuant to consent.”). Of potential

significance here, “where the officer’s real objective is search and seizure the

householder’s consent should not only be clearly voluntary, but also specifically directed

toward search and not merely toward entry.” Robbins v. MacKenzie, 364 F.2d 45, 49 (1st

Cir. 1966).

          Although Officers Hutchings and Nyberg did not have a warrant to search Merrill’s

home, my factual findings establish that Merrill, the homeowner, consented to the officers

entering his home for the very purpose of seeing the firearm when he said “come on in”

and stepped away from his door. Once inside, Merrill directed the officers to the firearm.

The parties do not contest whether Merrill expressed his consent 2 and instead focus on

whether Merrill’s consent was voluntary in light of Merrill’s mental illness.

A.        Voluntary Consent

          Whether consent is voluntarily given “turns on an assessment of the totality of the

circumstances,” particularly the “vulnerability of the consenting party.” United States v.

Barnett, 989 F.2d 546, 554–55 (1st Cir. 1993) (citing United States v. Mendenhall, 446

U.S. 544, 557 (1980)). In this assessment, courts in the First Circuit consider “age,


2
    In his brief, Merrill offers some argument that “this entry was without voluntary consent,” but did not
     resume this argument in the hearing. Motion 1 (ECF No. 49, #61). Regardless, I credit the officers’
     testimony on this point.
                                                     4
education, experience, intelligence, and knowledge of the right to withhold consent” as

well as more generalized factors such as “whether the consenting party was advised of his

or her constitutional rights and whether permission to search was obtained by coercive

means or under inherently coercive circumstances.” Id. at 555. The government shoulders

the burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence that consent was given knowingly

and voluntarily. Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 222; United States v. Perez-Montanez, 202 F.3d

434, 438 (1st Cir. 2000).

           1. Mental health considerations

           Specific to the issue of mental health, the First Circuit stated that “[a] consenting

party’s mental frailties may have a bearing upon this analysis,” but these “frailties are

entitled to little weight in the abstract.” 3 United States v. Coombs, 857 F.3d 439, 449 (1st

Cir. 2017). In order for a defendant’s mental illness to tip the scales against a finding of

voluntary consent, “there must be evidence of some nexus between, say, the individual’s

mental condition and the giving of consent, . . . or some evidence that officers obtained

consent by exploiting a known vulnerability.” Id.

           In Coombs, the First Circuit addressed an appellant’s argument that “his history of

mental illness—anxiety, depression, and bipolar disorder—vitiated his consent.” 857 F.3d

at 449. Based on the facts of the case and primarily on the testimony of the police officers

indicating that the appellant had remained calm and able to carry on a conversation despite


3
    When confronting the question of whether a confession was “voluntary,” the Supreme Court stated that
    while “the mental condition of the defendant” is a “more significant factor in the ‘voluntariness’ calculus
    . . . this fact does not justify a conclusion that a defendant’s mental condition, by itself and apart from its
    relation to official coercion, should ever dispose of the inquiry into constitutional ‘voluntariness.’”
    Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U.S. 157, 164 (1986).
                                                         5
being arrested and brought to the ground, the court saw no “nexus between the appellant’s

psychiatric history and the giving of consent.” Id. Therefore, the First Circuit upheld the

district court’s conclusion “that the appellant, even given his afflictions, was not so stressed

by the circumstances that his consent could be regarded as either coerced or otherwise

involuntary.” Id. at 449.

          Similarly, in United States v. Grap, the Seventh Circuit adopted a standard that

looks to the presence of “objective facts, as presented to a reasonable inquirer, that would

reasonably put him or her on notice that a voluntary consent could not be given.” 4 403

F.3d 439, 445 (7th Cir. 2005). In the absence of such facts, the Seventh Circuit upheld the

district court’s conclusion that a third-party was able to voluntarily consent to a warrantless

search of her garage despite having been diagnosed with a documented “delusional

disorder that impaired her ability to make rational decisions.” Id. at 441. The court relied

on the police officer’s testimony that there was “no indication that [the third-party] was

suffering from delusional symptoms, or that she was ‘out of touch’ with reality” and




4
    When applying this standard, the court commented that “reasonableness is the touchstone of validity of
    third-party consent to a search.” Grap, 403 F.3d at 444. The Seventh Circuit persuasively reasoned:
        The standard of what is reasonably apparent to a reasonable inquiring officer, with its emphasis
        on the deterrence rationale of the exclusionary rule, is the correct approach. The purpose of
        suppression of evidence obtained in an unreasonable search is to deter violations by officers of
        the Fourth Amendment. Obviously, they cannot be deterred by circumstances that are unknown
        to them, like the psychiatric history of the person consenting to a search. . . . The proper inquiry
        here focuses upon the objective facts, as presented to a reasonable inquirer, that would
        reasonably put him or her on notice that a voluntary consent could not be given. . . . And it
        should not be assumed . . . that anyone suffering from some type of mental disease or defect is
        inevitably incapable of giving a voluntary consent to a search.
    Id. at 444-45 (citations omitted).

                                                         6
concluded that “however potentially serious the effects of her psychosis, [her] behavior did

not indicate that she lacked the requisite mental capacity to consent.” 5 Id. at 443.

          I am persuaded by this line of reasoning and am satisfied that despite Merrill’s

mental health struggles, his consent was voluntarily given. The record establishes Officers

Hutchings and Nyberg were unaware of Merrill’s mental illness at the time of their

warrantless search. 6 Given the officers’ lack of knowledge of Merrill’s illness, I find that

they did not “obtain[] consent by exploiting a known vulnerability.” Coombs, 857 F.3d at

449. Furthermore, nothing in their interactions with Merrill indicated he was suffering

from a severe mental illness that manifestly would have vitiated his voluntary consent to

enter the residence. To the contrary, Merrill’s behavior suggests he was understood and

was amenable to the police officers’ requests. Like the defendant in Coombs, Merrill

remained calm and carried on a cogent conversation with the officers throughout their

interaction. He responded to their questions appropriately, even eagerly.


5
    See also United States v. Mustapher, 459 F. Supp. 2d 752, 758 (N.D. Ill. 2006) (“Voluntariness is
    measured by whether a reasonable observer would determine that the consenting person acted
    voluntarily.”).
6
    Defendant argues that although the individual officers had no actual knowledge of his mental illness, the
    Augusta Police Department had in its possession reports arising from previous interactions with Merrill,
    including an incident which resulted in Merrill being “blue papered” or involuntarily committed.
    Defendant contends this information should have been “imputed” to the officers at the scene. I am
    unaware of cases supporting an extension of the collective knowledge or fellow-officer rule to the context
    of this case and Defendant’s argument, while innovative, is unpersuasive. Even if the collective
    knowledge of the Augusta Police Department could be imputed to Officers Hutchings and Nyberg, at
    most, they would have been ‘aware’ that Merrill had been involuntarily committed and suffered from
    “mental issues.” Def.’s Ex. 1. The Augusta Police Department was not privy to Merrill’s medical
    progress notes and even if it had, its officers were not likely equipped with the training to understand or
    predict how Merrill’s medical diagnosis may, if at all, impact his ability to voluntarily consent. To
    presume that all suspects with a similarly vague history of mental illness cannot voluntarily consent to a
    search of the residence is untethered from scientific reason and philosophical notions of free will. More
    to the point, it is an unworkably paternalistic formulation of constitutional protections, burdening law
    enforcement officers with an epistemological conundrum far beyond the reach of their training that has
    never been part of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence.
                                                       7
       I see nothing in the record that would have put a reasonable officer on notice that

Merrill’s underlying mental health conditions precluded him from providing voluntary

consent at the time of the officers’ search, and Defendant offered no positive evidence to

the contrary. See, e.g., United States v. Reynolds, 646 F.3d 63, 73-74 (1st Cir. 2011)

(similarly relying on external indicators such as testimony that the defendant was

“responsive, lucid, and cooperative with the police officers” to conclude that “there was no

evidence that [the defendant] was affected by any underlying illness during the time of the

search.”); United States v. Coraine, 198 F.3d 306, 309–10 (1st Cir. 1999) (rejecting the

defendant’s claim that “an anxiety attack induced him to consent” and relying on external

indicators of his ability to consent by stating: “even if [the defendant] had a medical

condition that made him susceptible to an anxiety attack, and even if he became somewhat

upset at a point during his interrogation, his speech and demeanor appeared to be normal

when they asked for permission to search his mobile home”). In short, I see no evidence

of a “nexus between the appellant’s psychiatric history and the giving of consent.”

Coombs, 857 F.3d at 449.

       2. Coercion

       Merrill argues that due to his ongoing mental health issues, he was more susceptible

to coercion or more inclined to perceive aggression than the average defendant.

Essentially, Merrill argues that he is what we would label in a civil context an “eggshell

plaintiff.” Motion 6-7. I am not persuaded by this argument. As explained above, I see

no nexus between Merrill’s mental health condition and his consent. Vague allusions to

the historical fact that Merrill was involuntarily committed simply is not enough to

                                             8
establish a nexus between his diagnosis and consent. There are presumably many mental

health diagnoses that do not diminish a person’s ability to voluntarily consent.

Contrariwise, there may be other mental health conditions that do diminish the ability to

consent. Merrill did not offer any evidence that the officers should have known that his

particular mental health issues fell into the latter but not the former category. Moreover, it

is not clear how the APD officers would have known.

           Despite my determination that Merrill’s consent was not nullified by his mental

illness, as directed by First Circuit precedent, I look to the totality of the circumstances and

consider whether Merrill’s consent was “obtained by coercive means or under inherently

coercive circumstances.” 7 Barnett, 989 F.2d at 554–55. I find his consent was not coerced.

           In this case, the officers never drew their guns or physically threatened Merrill.

Merrill was not placed in custody or restrained by the officers. Merrill was not dramatically

outnumbered by the officers. Although, as Defendant argues, the officers voiced an

imperative by stating they needed to see the gun before leaving, the officers did not threaten

force or that they would get a warrant. Even if they had, I am unconvinced such a statement

would have risen to a level of coercion that would vitiate Merrill’s consent. See Perez-

Montanez, 202 F.3d at 438–39 (“an officer’s statement that he will ‘obtain other means’ to

seize evidence is not the same as saying that he is presently entitled, without the “other

means,” to the evidence. . . . Nor is there anything false or unduly coercive about a



7
    The First Circuit has stated: “In the context of the voluntariness of a confession, a defendant’s mental state
     by itself and apart from its relation to official coercion never disposes of the inquiry into constitutional
     voluntariness.” United States v. Palmer, 203 F.3d 55, 61-62 (1st Cir. 2000). Although speaking to
     concerns regarding the voluntariness of post-arrest statements, this logic nevertheless applies in this case.
                                                         9
statement of an intention to seek other means to obtain access to property.”); United States

v. Marshall, 348 F.3d 281, 286 (1st Cir. 2003) (“[T]he fact that the officers told [the

defendant] that they were going to search the apartment regardless of whether she

consented because they intended to get a warrant is not inherently coercive.”).

       The record establishes Merrill gave verbal and physical indications of his consent

to the officers entering his home. Once the officers were in his home, Merrill directed their

attention to the gun sitting in plain view, warned that the gun was loaded, explained his

purpose in having the firearm, offered to “show [the police] forensic evidence of where the

rounds struck to assist” in their investigation, and even stated that he “understood before

[he] [shot the gun], it was illegal.” Gov’t Ex. B-1. Merrill’s conduct under the totality of

the circumstances demonstrates consent free of coercion. See, e.g., United States v. Reith,

66 F. Supp. 2d 52, 56 (D. Me. 1999) (“Defendant not only led police into the bedroom of

his home and pointed out the briefcase containing the gun, but provided police with the

combination to the briefcase and warned them to use caution when opening it because the

gun might be loaded. Such conduct is strongly indicative of consent.”); United States v.

Reynolds, 2009 WL 1090674, at *6 (D. Me. Apr. 21, 2009), aff’d, 646 F.3d 63 (1st Cir.

2011) (“Although the situation may have been inherently coercive, this is not

determinative; the fact that [the defendant] immediately responded to [the officer’s]

question, and volunteered more information than he sought, shows that she was not coerced

into doing so.”).




                                             10
          3. Summary

          Although a few factors in the present case run contrary to a finding of voluntary

consent—for example, Merrill was not advised that he could withhold consent 8—the

totality of the circumstances militate strongly toward the conclusion that Merrill not only

possessed the capacity to consent, but that he in fact voluntarily consented. Thus, I am

satisfied the government has met its burden by establishing by a preponderance of evidence

that Merrill voluntarily consented to the officers’ search of his home.

                                            CONCLUSION

          Because Merrill voluntarily consented to the Officers’ search of his home, and the

parties offer no argument that the search exceeded the scope of his consent, I conclude that

the search was reasonable under the Fourth Amendment.

          Defendant Merrill’s Motion to Suppress (ECF No. 49) is DENIED.


          SO ORDERED.

          Dated this 19th day of February, 2019.


                                                          /s/ Lance E. Walker
                                                          LANCE E. WALKER
                                                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




8
    Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 227 (1973) (“While knowledge of the right to refuse consent is
     one factor to be taken into account, the government need not establish such knowledge as the sine qua
     non of an effective consent.”).
                                                     11
