 

Case 3:98-cr-00164-DRD Document 616 Filed 12/15/2005 Page 1 of4

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

  

 

 

UNITED STATES OF Ah{ERICA, *
v. * CR. NO. 00~14|
LUlS ARMANDO TORRES PEREZ, *
Defendant. *
_ ____________________________ X
0 R D E R
Because of the expected length of the trial in this case, an=. dship

on counsel in undertaking representation full-time for such a period Without compensation,
pursuant to paragraph 2.3 0 A of the Guidelines for the Administration of the Criminal Justice
_Agt, the following procedures for interim payments shall apply during the course of your
representation in this case:

l. Submission of Vouchers

Counsel may submit to the court clerk, on a monthly basis, an interim CJA Form 20,
“Appointment of and Authority to Pay Court-Appointed Counsel.” Compensation earned
and reimbursable expenses incurred in said month shall be claimed on an interim voucher
submitted no later than the tenth day of the next month. The first interim voucher submitted
shall reflect all compensation claimed and reimbursable expenses incurred from the date of
appointment until the initial month of interim request; thereafter, the vouchers shall be
submitted monthly. Counsel shall strike the pre-printed numbers on all but the first CJA
Form 20 submitted and substitute the number appearing on the first voucher therefore In
addition, counsel shall complete Itern 21 of the form. Each voucher shall be numbered in
series and include the time period each covers. lnterim vouchers may be submitted in
accordance With this schedule even though little or no compensation or expenses are claimed

for the respective periodl All interim vouchers shall be supported by detailed and itemized

 

 

 

Case 3:98-cr-00164-DRD Document 616 Filed 12/15/2005 Page 2 of 4

2
time and expense statements Chapter H, Part C of theGuidelines for the Administration of
the Criminal Justice Act outlines the procedures and rules for claims by CJA attorneys and
should be followed regarding each voucher. Counsel may at their discretion submit on a
regular basis only one final voucher.

The court shall review the interim voucher when submitted, particularly with regard
to the amount of time claimed, and will authorize compensation to be paid based on the
number of hours. The court will also authorize for payment all reimbursable expenses
reasonably incurred

At the conclusion of the representation, each counsel shall submit a final voucher.
The final voucher shall set forth in detail the time and expenses claimed for the entire case,
including all appropriate documentation Counsel shall reflect all compensation and
reimbursement previously received on the appropriate line of the final voucher, as well as the
net amount remaining to be paid at the conclusion of the case. After reviewing the final
voucher, the court will submit it to the Chief Judge of the Circuit or his/her delegate for
review and approval

2. Reirnbursable Expenses

 

Counsel may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses reasonably incurred incident
to the representation While the statute and applicable rules and regulations do not place a
monetary limit on the amount of expenses that can be incurred, counsel should incur no
single expense item in excess of $300.00 without prior approval of the Court. Such approval
may be sought by filing an ex parte application with the Clerk stating the nature of the
expense, the estimated dollar cost and the reason the expense is necessary to the
representation An application seeking such approval may be filediu camera, if necessary.
Upon finding that the expense is reasonable, the court will authorize counsel to incur it.
Recurring expenses, such as telephone toll calls, photocopying and photographs, which
aggregate more than $lO0.0() on one or more interim vouchers are not considered single

expenses requiring Court approval

 

 

Case 3:98-cr-00164-DRD Document 616 Filed 12/15/2005 Page 3 014

3

With respect to travel outside of the city of San Juan for the purpose of consulting
with the client or his or her former counsel, interviewing witnesses, etc., the $300.00 rule
should be applied in the following manner: Travel expenses such as mileage, parking, meals,
and lodging can be claimed as itemized expenses Therefore, if the reimbursement for
expenses relating to a single trip will aggregate an amount in excess of $300.00, the travel
should receive prior approval of the Court_

The following additional guidelines may be helpful to counsel:

a) Case-related travel utilizing a privately-owned automobile should be claimed at
a rate of 37.5 cents per mile, plus parking fees, ferry fares, and road tolls. Transportation
other than by privately-owned automobile should be claimed on an actual expense basis.

b) Actual expenses incurred for meals and lodging while traveling outside of the city
of San Juan, Puerto Rico in the course of this representation, must conform to the prevailing
limitations placed upon travel and subsistence expenses of federal judiciary employees in
accordance with existing government travel re gulations. For specific details concerning high
cost areas, counsel should consult the Clerk.

c) Telephone toll calls, telegrams, photocopying, and photographs can all be
reimbursable expenses, if reasonably incurred However, general office overhead, such as
rent, secretarial help and telephone service are not reimbursable expenses, nor are items of
a personal nature Expenses for service of subpoenas on fact witnesses are not reimbursable,
but rather are governed by F.R.Cr.P. 17 and 28 U.S.C. § 1825.

3. Further guestions or guidance

Answers to questions concerning appointment under the Criminal Justice Act can
generally be found in (l) 18 U.S.C. §3006A; (2) the Plan of the United States District Court
for the District of Puerto Rico, available through the Clerk, and (3) Guidelines for the
Administration of the Criminal Justice Act, published by the Adrninistrative Office of the
U.S. Courts, also available through the Clerk of Court. Should these references fail to

 

 

 

Case 3:98-cr-00164-DRD Document 616 Filed 12/15/2005 Page 4 014

4
provide the desired clarification or direction, counsel should address their inquiries directly
to the undersigned

This order is entered nunc pro tunc as of May 2000.

IT IS SO ORDERED.
San Juan, Puerto Ri`co, this 15th day %December 2005.
DANIEL R. DOMING EZ
U.S. DISTRICT .]UDGE
APPROVED: DATE:

 

Jeffrey R. Howard

U.S. Circuit Judge
Designee of the Chief Judge of the
U.S. Court of Appeals, First Circuit

 

