Case 3:98-cr-00152-CC Document 222 Filed 09/07/2005 Page 1 of 2

Julio Gonzalez§ ;`;g r_
Reg- NO. 16729-069:' d YFf‘i"h m
FCI FOIt_DiX_E? fsi
Unit 58€.‘>'2.7 ' 1
90 BOX 7000 LV,. Hh_ ’“ f’
Fort Dix, NJ-rf 0 640 }': H'

 

 

 

 

August 27, 2005W'£

Honorable Carmen Consuelo Cerezo
United States District Judge
United States District Court

150 Carlos Chardon Avenue
Federal Building

San Juan, PR 00918-1767

RE: United States v. Gonzalez
Case No. 98-CR"152~02

 

Dear Judge Cerezo:

l am an inmate confined at the Federal Correctional Institution (FCI), Fort
Dix, NJ. l was a defendant before Your Honor in the above-referenced case.

On August 2, 2005, I sent Your Honor a letter concerning a dilenna l am
faced with here at the prison. (Please see attached.)

Your Honor imposed a $200 assessment and a restitution of $25,905 to be paid
in 60 installments while on supervised release. Hence, the $200 assessment has
been paid in full.

Since my incarceration l've tried to better myself, as l have completed a
course in Basic Residential Wiring, Art Painting, Cinena, Card Making, Exercise
Course, and Anger Managenent. l will be enrolled in Parenting Class in September
2005, and seeking enrollment also in a Hazardous Material Course in which we were
told that is a lucrative business in the free world. l am trying_to do all that
is right to better myself and make amends to society and my family.

The purpose of me writing this letter is to seek Your Honor's intervention
concerning this restitution. That is, the restitution is supposed to be paid in
60 installments upon release and while on supervised release. Here at the prison
l am working in UNICOR or Federal Prison Industries, lnc., where l earned the
"most" in a month is $195 and 50% or § of this amount is automatically deducted
out of my account for the purpose of restitution. This allows me a maximum of
about 593~595/month. lt should also be noted that if l have "Callouts"
(appointments) for medical, education, unit team, etc, hours are deducted and the
monthly total could be much less. Working in UNICOR is not a sure/constant job
because at anytime we could be laid-off as I have in the past and no pay is
given.

I have two seven year old daughters who lives in Puerto Rico with.their
mothers and I have been trying to save money to have my daughters and their
nothers visit with me. Everytime I call and speak with.my daughters they are
always asking when they could visit with me and its a heart breaking think to
tell then that l don't know (because l do not have the money). l have been

 

 

Case 3:98-cr-00152-CC Document 222 Filed 09/07/2005 Page 2 of 2

trying to save my money in an effort to have my daughters visit me; obviously,
however, this is not possible because of the 50% taken automatically. l also
smoke, drink coffee, must purchase stamps and pay for phone calls. Thus, it
should be noted that it cost $0.23 a minute (flat fee) for calls. Moreover,

for me to watch TV l have to purchase batteries as all of the Tvs are tuned in
on a FM, radio frequency. Tb use the typewriters, l must purchase a print wheel
for $36.00, and I must also purchase typewriter rihbons and correctable ribbons.
Additionally, I have to purchase hygiene items and certain clothing items, which
are not furnished by the institution. Adding up those costs allows for no sav-
ings to assist in getting my two daughters to visit me from Puerto Rico.

The restitution imposed is $25,950, and now with interest, it is $30,722.
96. ln this kind Of way, I would never be able to pay off the interest, let
alone the actual restitution¢z

Let me point out that on three occasions within the past month I called
Puerto Rico through my unit counselor (Mr. Sanchez) to be able to speak with
Mr. Edwin Benitez, Financial Litigation Unit. (Please see attached letter §z;
dated July 12, 2005, from_Mr. Benitez). All three times l couldn't get to Mr.
Binetez and messages have been left for Mr. Benitez to call Mr. Sanchez. When
I asked the person answering the phone as to whom I was speaking with, the per-
sone refused to give his name(s) during all three phone calls. No calls were
ever returned to my counselor, Mr. Sanchez.

Although the Judgment and Commitment Order indicated that the restitution
is to be paid while on supervised release, my unit team (the staff at the unit)
informed me that Your Honor's order isn't clear enough for them to interpret.
However, I was told that l should write to Your Honor to get an order to make
it clear that the restitution is to be paid while on supervised release in 60
installments. Additionally, it was pointed out that Your Honor issuing an
order that the restitution be paid on supervised release will give me some time
within which l would have sufficient money saved to bring my two daughters to
visit with me. Also, l would be able to pay for a few college courses, which
are offered here at the institution.

I am, therefore, requesting of Your Honor to please clarify and issue an
Order in that the restitution is to be paid in 60 installments while I am on
supervised release. This would also allow me to save my prison-job money to
get my two daughters to visit with me from Puerto Rico. The Order should be
sent to the Case Manager and a copy to me:

Mr. Bullock

Case Manager

FCI Fort Dix West

P.O. BoX 38

Fort Dix, NJ 08640-0907.

Thank you for your time and concern.

I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct
pursuant to Title 28 USC § 1746.

Respectfully submitted,

ll im

ijlio Gonzalej§

Enclosure(s}

 

 

