Case 3:99-cr-00077-JAF Document 756 Filed 03/28/2005 Page 1 of3

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

FEDERICO VILLARMAN OVIEDO,
Petitioner,
v. Case No. 99-077JAF

   

m f
C §§ in
UNITED sTATES or AMERICA, m-°°;§ `5»: §§
Respondent. iii §§ §§
§`E;_ §§ 33
MOTION FOR NEW TRIAL `§ m ;:
T' , §§ 5
NOW COMES, Federico Villarman-Oviedo, hereinafter referre§§tq as) ;j
$'3 co §§

Petitioner and prays this Honorable Court for a new trial fn *GH
view of the United States recent Suprema Court Confrontation Clause
ruling, Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 74 CrL 401 (2004).

The District Court erred in depriving Petitioneruifthe right to cross-
examinewitnessesagainst him, in violation of the sixth amendment.
During trial, Petitioner’s effort toelicit impeachment and/or
exculpatory evidence on the involvement of Valerio, the key witness
for the prosecution, was thwarted by the court.

There is more than a reasonable probability that had Petitioner been
timely provided with the specific information on Valerio's identity
and hispleaagreement with the government as ordered by the District
Court pursuant to repeated defense motions requesting discovery from
the government of this specific information, and had Petitioner been
given the rightful opportunity to investigate Valerio's criminal
activities, the resulting impeachment evidence presented by Petitioner
to the jury would have had a devastating impact on Valerio's
credibility, and the result of this preceeding would have been

altered favorably towards Petitioner's aquittal. The trial court
erred in failing to enforce Petitioner's pretrial request for timely

discovery by the government of the often-times requested impeachment

Case 3:99-cr-00077-JAF Document 756 Filed 03/28/2005 Page 2 of 3

evidence on Valerio, thereby preventing him from adequately preparing
and formulating his defense. The trial court also erred in expressly
restricting Petitioner's consel in her cross-examination of Valerio v
with respect to his involvement in drug trafficking activities and

his plea agreement with the government. As a consequence of the
governmentis misconduct in disregarding its discovery obligations
pursuant to the Federal Code of Evidence and the trial court orders

to comply with said obligations, compounded by the above-mentioned
errors of the trial court sanctioning the government's misconduct,
Petitioner was prejudicially deprived of his Sixth Amendment right to
cross-examine witnesses against him.

The trial court abused its discretion in failing to enforce Petitioner's
pretrial requestsi©m timely discovery by the government of the
impeachment evidence on Valeriorepeamediytrequesmedsby the Petitioner,
therebypreventinghim from exercising his right to prepare and
formulate his best possible defense. The trial court also erred in
expressly restricting Petitioner’s counsel in her cross-examination
of Valerio with respect to his involvement in drug trafficking
activities and his plea agreement with the governmenti

The government's intentional non-compliance with its discovery
obligations under the Federal Code of Evidence and the trial court's
errors in sanctioning the government's misconduct prejudicially
prevented Petitioner from exercising his Sixth Amendmentrigntto'
cross-examine witnesses against him.

Since the Supreme Court's landmark ruling on requirements of
confrontation Clause, Crawford rule for admission of hearsay is
applicable retroactively on habeas review, Crawford v. Washington,

541 U.S. 36, 74 Crl 501 (2004), Petitioner respectfully moves that

Case 3:99-cr-00077-JAF Document 756 Filed 03/28/2005 Page 3 of 3

the judgment entered against him be reversed and a new trial granted
during which he is not deprived of his constitutional right to cross-

examine the witnesses against him.

Dated: MM§ %%/M%A%MMM

%e derico Villarman- Oviedo

#j?§&§é@?

Federal Correction Complex
P.O. Box 1031
Coleman, FL 33521

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICEv

I, Federico Villarman-Oviedo, hereby certifty under penalty of perjury,
that l have deposited in the US Mails, the foregoing copy to the U.S.
Attroney‘s office at; U.S. Attorney's Office, Torre Chardon, Suite 1201,

350 Carlos Chardon Ave., Hato Rey, PR 00918 on the_ZCj of March, 2005.

  

Fe erico VillarmanTOviedo
# 1¥34¢¢7 Oé‘¢"

Federal Correction Complex
P .O. Box 1031

Coleman, FL 33521

