Jan-1 0-06   15
             Case      From-US ATTORNEY
                :34 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM         Document 14   Filed 01/13/2006   Page 1 of 7



                                  V).IITED STATES DXSTRICT COURT
                              FOR TXE DISTRICT OF RHODE IS-




               Pursuant to Rule l l ( c ) ( l ) of the Federal Rules of Criminal
      Procedure, the United States and Defendant, MARLON C U U N I N G W have

      reached the following agreement:
               1.    Defendant's Obligations.
                     a.   Defendant will plead guilty to the Indictment, which
      charges Defendant with.possessing a sawed-off shotgun, in
      violation of 26 U.S.C.          ยง 5 8 6 1 (d)    .
               2.    Government's Obligations.

      In exchange for Defendant's plea of guilty:
                     a.   The government will recommend that the Court impose
      a term o f imprisonment at the low end of the range of sentences

      for the offense level determined by the Court under the United
      States Sentencing Guidelines (the U.S.S.G. or nguidelinesn)or the

      mandatory minimum term of imprisonment pursuant to statute,
      whichever term is greater, but not including probation or a

       nsplit-sentence,m even if permitted under the guidelines.;

                     b.   For purposes of determining the offense level, the
      government agrees to recommend a two-level reduction in the
                                      ..  . .
Jan-1 0-06 15 :34   From-US ATTORNEY
         Case 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM      Document 14       Filed 01/13/2006    Page 2 of 7


     offense level for acceptance of responsibility under B 3El.l(a) of
     the guidelines if Defendant continues to demonstrate acceptance of
     responsibility through sentencing.
                    c.    As of t h e date       of this agreement, Defendant has
     timely notified authorities of an intention to enter a plea of
     guilty.        If the offense level is 16 or greater and Defendant
     enters a plea of guilty pursuant to this agreement, the government
     will move the sentencing Court for an additional decrease of one
     level, pursuant to U.S.S.G.             s    3El.l(b)(2), unless Defendant
     indicates an intention not to enter a plea of guilty, thereby
     requiring the government to prepare for trial.
                    d.     The government is free to recommend              any combination
     of supervised release, fines, and restitution which it deems
     appropriate.
              3.    Defendant understands that the guidelines are not
     binding on the Court, and that, although the Court must consult
     the guidelines in fashioning any sentence in this case, the
     guidelines are only advisory, and the Court may impose any
     reasonable sentence in. this matter up to the statutory m i m u m
     penalties after taking into account the factors enumerated in 18
     U.S.C. S 3553 (a).
              4.    Except as expressly provided in the preceding paragraph,
     there is no agreement as to which Offense Level and cri&nal
     History Category applies in this case.                 Both the United States and
Jan-1 0-06 15 :34  F r om-US ATTORNEY
           Case 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM         Document 14    Filed 01/13/2006   Page 3 of 7



     Defendant reserve their rights to argue and present evidence on
     all matters affecting the guidelines calculation.
              5.    The defendant understands that the maximum statutory

     penalties      ยฃ01:   t h e offense t o which he has agreed t o plead guilty,
     are 1 0 years imprisonment; 3 years of supervised release; a
     $10,000 fine and a $100 special assessment.

              6,    Defendant agrees that, after Defendant and Defendant's
     counsel sign this agreement, counsel will return it to the United
     States Attorney's Office along with a money order or certified
     check, payable to the Clerk, United States District Court, in
     payment of the special assessments.                  Failure to do so, unless the
     Court has made a pravious finding of indigence, will relieve the
     government o f its obligation to recommend a reduction in the
     offense level under the guidelines for acceptance of
     responsibility.
              7.    Defendant is' advised and understands that:
                            The government has the right, in a prosecution For
                            perjury o r making a falee statement, to use against
                            Defendant any statement that Defendant gives under
                            oath;   .
                            DeTendant has the right to plead not guilty, or
                            having already so pleaded, to persist in that plea;
                            Defendant has the right to a jury trial;
                            Defendant has the right to be represented by
                            counsel     -   and if necessary have the Court appoint
                                                   3
Jan-1 0-06   15 :34     F r om-US ATTORNEY
             Case 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM           Document 14   Filed 01/13/2006   Page 4 of 7



                                 counsel     - at trial and every other stage of the
                                 proceeding;
                        e.       Defendant has the right at trial to confront and
                                 cross-examine adverse witnesses, to be protected
                                  from self-incrimination, to testify and present
                                  evidence, and to compel the attendance of
                                 witnesses; and
                         f.      Defendant waives these trial rights if the Court
                                  accepts-a plea o f guilty.
                8.      Defendant is advised that the government has in its
      possession certain physical evidence.                    Defendant understands that
      the government does not intend to conduct DNA testing of any of
      this evidence.                Defendant further understands that Defendant could
      request DNA testing of such evidence in this case prior to any
      finding of guilt against Defendant.                     Defendant further understands
      that, following this Court's entry of a judgment of conviction fox

      the offense[s] to which Defendant is pleading guilty, Defendant
      has the right to request DNA testing o f such evidence pursuant to
       18 U . S . C .    ยง    3600.

                Knowing and understanding this right to request such DNA
       testing, Defendant hereby knowingly and voluntarily waives and
      gives up that right.                   Defendant understands that Defendant will
      never have another opportunity to have the evidence in this case
       submitted for DNA testing or to employ the results of DNA testing
       to support a c l a i m that Defendant is innocent of the offense[s] to
Jan-1 0-06 Case     F rom-US ATTORNEY
           15:35 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM    Document 14    Filed 01/13/2006   Page 5 of 7



   which Defendant is pleading guilty.                Defendant further understands

    that by waiving and giving up this DNA testing right, the physical
    evidence in this case need not be retained for any such purpose.
            9.    Defendant gives up all ownership interest in the
    firearm.
           lo.    The government reserves its full right of allocution,
    including the right to present any information to the Court for
    its consideration in fashioning an appropriate sentence, the right
    to correct misstatements, misrepresentations, or omissions by
    Defendant, and to answer any questions asked by the Court.
            11.   Ezcept for paragraph 2 above, the parties have made no

    agreement concerning the application of the guide]. ines                    this
    case.
            12.   Defendant understands that the Court alone makes all
    sentencing decisions, including the application of the guidelines
    and the sentence to be imposed. The Court is not bound by the
    partiest stipulations of f a c t , offense level adjustments, or the
    government's recommendgtions. The Court is free to impose any
    sentence it deems appropriate up to and including the statutory
    maximum.      Defendant also understands that even if the Court's
    guideline determinations and sentence are different than Defendant
    expects, Defendant will not be allowed to withdraw
    Defendant's plea of guilty.
            13.   This agreement is binding on the government only if
    Defendant pleads guilty, fulfills all Defendant's obligations
Jan-1 0-06 15
           Case      F r om-US ATTORNEY
              :35 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM     Document 14     Filed 01/13/2006   Page 6 of 7



    under the agreement, does not engage in any conduct constituting
    obstruction of justice under S 3Cl.l of the guidelines, aka docs
    not commit any new offenses. Defendant understands that if
    Defendant violates this agreement in any way, the govexnment shall

    be released from its obligations under the agreement and will be
    free to make any reconrmendations that it deem appropriate.                       If
    that occurs, Defendant-shallnot have the right to withdraw
    Defendant's guilty plea.
           14.     This agreement is limited to the ~istrictof Rhode
    Island and does not bind any other federal, state, or local
    prosecutive authorities.
           15.     This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
    the parties.        No other promises or inducements have been made
    concerning the plea in this case. Defendant acknowledges that no
    person has, directly o r indirectly, threatened or coerced
    Defendant to enter this agreement.                  Any additions, deletions, or
    modifications to this agreement must be made in writing and signed
    by all the parties in order to be effective.
            16.    Counsel for Defendant states that Counsel has read this
    agreement, bean given a copy of it for Counsel's file, emlained
    it to Defendant, and states that to the best o f Counsel's
    knowledge and belief, Defendant understands the agreement.
Jan-1 0-06   15 :35   From-US ATTORNEY
         Case 1:05-cr-00117-T-DLM        Document 14   Filed 01/13/2006   Page 7 of 7



                17.   Defendant states that Defendant has read the agreement
     or has had it read to Defendant, has discussed it with Defendant's

     Counsel, understands it, and agrees to              it6   provisions.



    / ~ e fendant

        G,&-
      EDWARD C. ROY, ESQ.
                                                             \ ( (~(06'
                                                          Date
      Counsel for Defendant

                  L
      ZECHARIAH CHAFEE                                    Date
      Assistant U.S. Attorney



              stant U.S. Attorney
              f, Criminal Division
