 Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM    Document 37    Filed 05/24/2006   Page 1 of 7



                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                     FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND



UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

         v.                                           CR. N O . 06-05-028

VAUflHATDY SOWAUNAXAB


                              PLEA   AGREEMJ3NT

     Pursuant to Rule 11 (c)(1)(B)of the Federal Rules of Criminal

Procedure, the United States and Defendant, Vanhhatdy Souvaunaxab
have reached the following agreement:
     1.       Defendant's Obligations.

              a.   Defendant will plead guilty to Count I of the

Indictment which charges Defendant with knowingly possessing an

unregistered pipe bomb in violation of 26 U.S.C. 55 5841, 5861(d)
and 5871, and Count I1 of the Indictment which charges Defendant
with damaging and destroying by fire a building which also
resulted in personal injury, in violation of 18 U.S.C.            §§   844(i)
and 2.
     2.       Government's Obligations.     In exchange for Defendant's
pleas of guilty:
              a.   The government will recommend that the Court impose
a term of imprisonment within the range of sentences for the
offense level determined by the Court under the United States
Sentencing Guidelines.
     Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37   Filed 05/24/2006       Page 2 of 7



              b.   For purposes of determining the offense level, the

government agrees to recommend a two-level reduction in the
offense level for acceptance of responsibility under              §   3El.l(a) of
the guidelines if Defendant continues to demonstrate acceptance of
responsibility through sentencing.

              c.   As of the date of this agreement, Defendant has
timely notified authorities of an intention to enter a plea of
guilty.       If the offense level is 16 or greater and Defendant
enters a plea of guilty pursuant to this agreement, the government
will move the sentencing Court for an additional decrease of one

level, pursuant to U.S.S.G.      §   3El.l(b)(2), unless Defendant
indicates an intention not to enter a plea of guilty, thereby
requiring the government to prepare for trial.
              d.   The government is free to recommend any combination

of    supervised release, fines, and restitution which it deems

appropriate.

       3.      Defendant understands that the guidelines are not
binding on the Court, and that, although the Court must consult
the guidelines in fashioning any sentence in this case, the
guidelines are only advisory, and the Court may impose any

reasonable sentence in this matter up to the statutory maximum
penalties after taking into account the factors enumerated in 18
U.S.C.    §   3553(a).
       4.      Except as expressly provided in the preceding paragraph,
   Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37   Filed 05/24/2006   Page 3 of 7



there is no agreement as to which Offense Level and Criminal
History Category applies in this case.       Both the United States and

Defendant reserve their rights to argue and present evidence on

all matters affecting the guidelines calculation.
     5.   The maximum statutory penalties for the offense to which
defendant is pleading are: (a) Count 1, ten years imprisonment; a
fine of $10,000; a term of supervised release of three years; and
a mandatory special assessment of $100; (b) Count 11, forty years

imprisonment with a mandatory minimum sentence of seven years; a
fine of $250,000; a term of supervised release of five years; and
a special assessment of $100.     If imposed consecutively, the

maximum penalties for all offenses to which Defendant is pleading

guilty are fifty years imprisonment; a fine of $260,000; and a

term of supervised release of eight years.       The mandatory special
assessment totals $200.
     6.   Defendant agrees that, after Defendant and Defendant's

counsel sign this agreement, counsel will return it to the United
States Attorney's Office along with a money order or certified
check, payable to the Clerk, United States District Court, in
payment of the special assessments.      Failure to do so, unless the
Court has made a previous finding of indigence, will relieve the
government of its obligation to recommend a reduction in the
offense level under the guidelines for acceptance of
responsibility.
     7.   Defendant is advised and understands that:

                                    3
 Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37    Filed 05/24/2006   Page 4 of 7



                 The government has the right, in a prosecution for
                 perjury or making a false statement, to use against
                 Defendant any statement that Defendant gives under

                 oath;
                 Defendant has the right to plead not guilty, or

                 having already so pleaded, to persist in that plea;
                 Defendant has the right to a jury trial;
                 Defendant has the right to be represented by
                 counsel - and if necessary have the Court appoint
                 counsel - at trial and every other stage of the
                 proceeding;
                 Defendant has the right at trial to confront and

                 cross-examine adverse witnesses, to be protected

                 from self-incrimination, to testify and present

                 evidence, and to compel the attendance of
                 witnesses; and

                 Defendant waives these trial rights if the Court
                 accepts a plea of guilty.
     8.   Defendant is advised that the government has in its

possession certain physical evidence.       Defendant understands that
the government does not intend to conduct DNA testing of any of
this evidence.    Defendant further understands that Defendant could
request DNA testing of such evidence in this case prior to any
finding of guilt against Defendant.        Defendant further understands

that, following this Court's entry of a judgment of conviction for
                                    4
   Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37   Filed 05/24/2006   Page 5 of 7



the offenses to which Defendant is pleading guilty, Defendant has

the right to request DNA testing of such evidence pursuant to 18

U.S.C.   §   3600.

     Knowing and understanding this right to request such DNA
testing, Defendant hereby knowingly and voluntarily waives and
gives up that right.     Defendant understands that Defendant will
never have another opportunity to have the evidence in this case
submitted for DNA testing or to employ the results of DNA testing

to support a claim that Defendant is innocent of the offense[s] to
which Defendant is pleading guilty.      Defendant further understands
that by waiving and giving up this DNA testing right, the physical

evidence in this case need not be retained for any such purpose.

     9.       The government reserves its full right of allocution,

including the right to present any information to the Court for
its consideration in fashioning an appropriate sentence, the right
to correct misstatements, misrepresentations, or omissions by

Defendant, and to answer any questions asked by the Court.
     10.      Except for paragraph 2, above, the parties have made no
agreement concerning the application of the guidelines in this
case.
     11.      Defendant understands that the Court alone makes all

sentencing decisions, including the application of the guidelines
and the sentence to be imposed.      The Court is not bound by the
parties' stipulations of fact, offense level adjustments, or the
government's recommendations.      The Court is free to impose any
   Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37    Filed 05/24/2006   Page 6 of 7



sentence it deems appropriate up to and including the statutory

maximum.   Defendant also understands that even if the Court's

guideline determinations and sentence are different than Defendant

expects, Defendant will not be allowed to withdraw
Defendant' s plea of guilty.

     12. Defendant understands that Defendant may have the right
to file a direct appeal from the sentence imposed by the Court.
Defendant hereby waives Defendant's right to file a direct appeal,

if the sentence imposed by the Court is within the guideline range

determined by the Court or lower. This agreement does not affect

the rights or obligations of the United States as set forth in 18
U.S.C. 5 3742(b), and the government retains its right to appeal
any of the Court's sentencing determinations.

     13.   This agreement is binding on the government only if

Defendant pleads guilty, fulfills all Defendant's obligations
under the agreement, does not engage in any conduct constituting

obstruction of justice under     §   3Cl.l of the guidelines, and does
not commit any new offenses.         Defendant understands that if

Defendant violates this agreement in any way, the government shall
be released from its obligations under the agreement and will be
free to make any recommendations that it deems appropriate.              If
that occurs, Defendant shall not have the right to withdraw
Defendant's guilty plea.
   Case 1:06-cr-00005-ML-DLM   Document 37   Filed 05/24/2006   Page 7 of 7



     14.    This agreement is limited to the District of Rhode
Island and does not bind any other federal, state, or local
prosecutive authorities.

     15.    This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
the parties. No other promises or inducements have been made

concerning the plea in this case.      Defendant acknowledges that no
person has, directly or indirectly, threatened or coerced
Defendant to enter this agreement. Any additions, deletions, or
modifications to this agreement must be made in writing and signed
by all the parties in order to be effective.
     16.    Counsel for Defendant states that Counsel has read this

agreement, been given a copy of it for Counsel's file, explained
it to Defendant, and states that to the best of Counsel's
knowledge and belief, Defendant understands the agreement.
     17.    Defendant states that Defendant has read the agreement

or has had it read to Defendant, has discussed it with Defendant's

Counsel, understands it, and agrees to its provisions.

                                                  5 - 2 2.06
                                             Date
Defendant




m    el for Defendant


     D B. SULLIVAN
                  s
     tant U.S. Attorney
     , Criminal Division
