    Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA       Document 28       Filed 02/20/2007    Page 1 of 10



                    IN T3E UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                     FOR THE DISTRICT OF REODE IsIUD


UITITED STATES 08 AMERICA

         v.                                         Cr. No. 66-130-018

JEFFRA DEJESUS




       Pursuant t o Rule I l ( c ) (1) of the Federal Rules of Criminal

Procedure, the United States and Defendant, JEFFRA DEJESUS, have

reached the following agreement:

       1.     Defendant's Obligations.

              a.   Defendant w i l l plead g u i l t y t o :

              (i) Count One of the Indictment, which charges Defendant
with possession w i t h the intent t o distribute 5 0 0 grams or more of

cocaine, in violation of 21 U.S.C.               § § 8 4 1 (a)(1)   and (b)(1)(B);
and,
              (ii) Count Two of the Indictment, which charges
Defendant with possession of a firearm w i t h an obliterated serial

number, in violation of 18 U.S.C.            §    922(k).

              b.   Defendant further agrees that the , 3 5 7 Rossi
Revolver with an obliterated serial number, which is a firearm as

defined in 18 U.S.C. 5 921, seized from Defendant and currently in

the custody and/or control of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and

Firearms, was properly seized and i s subject to forfeiture to the

United States pursuant t o 18 U . S . C .         § 924.    Defendant hereby
    Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA     Document 28    Filed 02/20/2007   Page 2 of 10



relinquishes to the United States of ~ m e r i c aany claim, title and

interest Defendant has in said firearm.

      Defendant further states that Defendant is the sole and

rightful owner of said firearm and agrees to withdraw any claim

made in any civil, administrative or judicial forfeiture brought

against said firearm and further agrees not to oppose any civil,

administrative or judicial forfeiture of said firearm.

      2.     Governmentls Obligations.         In exchange for Defendant's

plea of guilty:

             a.    The government will recommend that the Court impose

a term of imprisonment at the lowest point of sentences for the

offense level determined by the Court under the United States

Sentencing Guidelines (the U.S.S.G.        or nguidelinesn)or the

mandatory minimum term of imprisonment pursuant to statute,

whichever term is greater, but not including probation or a

                 even if permitted under the guidelines.
usplit-sentence,ll                                                        If the

Court determines the defendant is eligible for the "safety valvet1

under 18 U . S . C .   1 3553(f) (1)-(51, the government will recommend

the low end of the guideline range without regard to the mandatory

minimum pursuant to statute.
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA   Document 28   Filed 02/20/2007   Page 3 of 10



          b.    For purposes of determining the offense level, the

government agrees to recommend a two-level reduction in the

offense level for acceptance of responsibility under B 3El.l(a) of

the guidelines if Defendant continues to demonstrate acceptance of

responsibility through sentencing.

          c.    As of the date of this agreement, Defendant has

timely notified authorities of an intention to enter a plea of

guilty.   If the offense level is 16 or greater and Defendant

enters a plea of guilty pursuant to this agreement, the government

w i l l move the sentencing Court for an additional decrease of one

level, pursuant to U.S.S.G. I 3El.l(b)(2), unless Defendant

indicates an intention not to enter a plea of guilty, thereby

requiring the government to prepare for trial.

           d.   The Government will recommend that Defendant qualify

for the "safety valven provided that:

                i. Defendant meets with government representatives,

not later than one month in advance of the scheduled sentencing

date and truthfully provides a l l information and evidence

Defendant has concerning the offense(s) to which Defendant pleads

guilty and which were part of the same course of conduct or of a

common scheme or plan; and
     Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA           Document 28   Filed 02/20/2007   Page 4 of 10



                       ii. Defendant otherwise meets the statutory

requirements for t h e "safety valven as set f o r t h in 18 U.S.C.                   §


3553(f) (1)-(4). Defendant understands that there is a dispute

regarding his eligibility for "safety valven under 18 U.S.C.                      §


3553   (f)( 2 )   .
                  e.    The government is free to recommend any combination

of     supervised release, fines, and restitution which it deems

appropriate.

        3.        Defendant understands that the guidelines are not

binding on the Court, and that, although the Court must consult

the guidelines in fashioning any sentence in this case, the

guidelines are only advisory, and the Court may impose any

reasonable sentence in this matter up to the statutory maximum

penalties a f t e r taking into account the factors enumerated in 18

U.S.C. S 3 5 5 3 ( a ) .

        4.        Both the United States and Defendant reserve their

rights to argue and present evidence on all matters affecting the

guidelines calculation.

        5.        The maximum statutory penalties for the offenses to

which the Defendant is pleading are as follows:

                  a.    Count O n e :
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA    Document 28    Filed 02/20/2007     Page 5 of 10



                 (i) 40 years imprisonment, with a mandatory minimum

term of 5 years imprisonment;

                 (ii) a fine o f - $2,000,000;

                 (iii)a minimum term of supemised release of 4

years, not to exceed life; and

                 (iv) a mandatory special assessment of            $100.

          b.   Count Two:

                 (i)   5 years imprisonment;

                 (ii) a fine of $ 250,000;

                 ( i i i ) a 3 year term of supervised release; and

                 (iv) a mandatory special assessment of             $100.

          c.   Thus, if imposed consecutively, the maximum

penalties for all offenses to which Defendant is pleading guilty

are 45 imprisonment; a fine of $ 2,250,000; and,           a     tern of

supervised release of up to life.        The mandatory special

assessment totals $     200.


     6.   Defendant agrees that, after Defendant and Defendantts

counsel sign this agreement, counsel will return it to the United

States Attorney's Office along with a money order or certified

check, payable to the Clerk, United States District Court, in

payment of the special assessments.          Failure to do so, unless the
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA     Document 28    Filed 02/20/2007   Page 6 of 10



Court has made a previous finding of indigence, will relieve the

government of its obligation to recommend a reduction in the

offense level under t h e guidelines f o r acceptance of

responsibility.

     7.   Defendant is advised and understands that:

                The government has the right, in a prosecution for

                perjury or making a false statement, to uae against

                Defendant any statement that Defendant gives under

                oath;

                Defendant has the right to plead not guilty, or

                having already so pleaded, to persist in t h a t plea;

                Defendant has the right to a jury trial;

                Defendant has the right to be represented by

                  counsel   -   and i f necessary have t h e Court appoint

                  counsel   -   a t t r i a l and every other stage of the

                  proceeding;

                  Defendant has the right at trial to confront and

                  cross-examine adverse witnesses, to be protected

                  from self-incrimination, to testify and present

                  evidence, and t o compel the attendance of

                  witnesses; and
    Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA    Document 28    Filed 02/20/2007   Page 7 of 10



              f.     Defendant waives these trial rights if the Court

                     accepts a plea of guilty.

      8.     Defendant is advised that the government has in its

possession certain physical evidence.           Defendant understands that

the government does not intend to conduct DNA testing of any of

t h i s evidence.    Defendant f u r t h e r understands that Defendant could

request DNA testing of such evidence in this case prior to any

finding of guilt against Defendant.           Defendant further understands

that, following this Court's entry of a judgment of conviction for

the offense to which Defendant is pleading guilty, Defendant has

the right to request DNA testing of such evidence pursuant to 18

U.S.C.     § 3600.


      Knowing and understanding this right to request such DNA

testing, Defendant hereby knowingly and voluntarily waives and

gives up that right.       Defendant understands that Defendant will

never have another opportunity to have the evidence in this case

submitted for DNA testing or to employ the results of DNA testing

to support a claim that Defendant is innocent of t h e offense[s] to

which Defendant is pleading guilty.           Defendant further understands

that by waiving and giving up this DNA testing right, the physical

evidence in this ease need not be retained for any such purpose.
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA   Document 28   Filed 02/20/2007   Page 8 of 10



        9.    The government reserves its full right of allocution,

including the right to present any information to the Court for

its consideration in fashioning an appropriate sentence, the right

to correct misstatements, misrepresentations, or omissions by

Defendant, and to answer any questions asked by the Court.

        10.   Except for paragraph 2 above, the parties have made no

agreement concerning the application of the guidelines in this

case.

        11.   Defendant understands that the Court alone makes all

sentencing decisions, including the application of the guidelines

and the sentence to be imposed.      The Court is not bound by the

partiesr stipulations of fact, offense level adjustments, or the

government's recomendations.       The Court is free to impose any

sentence it deems appropriate up to and including the statutory

maximum.      Defendant also understands that even if the Court's

guideline determinations and sentence are different than Defendant

expects, Defendant will not be allowed to withdraw Defendant's

plea of guilty.

        12.   Defendant understands that Defendant may have t h e right

to file a direct appeal from the sentence imposed by the Court.

Defendant hereby waives Defendant's right t o file a direct appeal

if the United States Sentencing Guidelines base offense level
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA   Document 28   Filed 02/20/2007   Page 9 of 10



determined by the Court is 22 or lower and the sentence imposed by

the Court is within the guideline range determined by the Court or

lower.     This agreement does not affect the rights or obligations

of the United States as set forth in 18 U.S.C.         §   3742(b), and the

government retains its right to appeal any of the Court's

sentencing determinations.

     13.    This agreement is binding on the government only if

Defendant pleads guilty, fulfills all Defendant's obligations

under the agreement, does not engage in any conduct constituting

obstruction of justice under f 3Cl.l of the guidelines, and does

not commit any new offenses.      Defendant understands that if

Defendant violates this agreement in any way, the government shall

be released from its obligations under the agreement and will be

free to make any recommendations that it deems appropriate.             If

that occurs, Defendant shall not have the right to withdraw

Defendant's guilty plea.

     14.    This agreement is limited to the District of Rhode

Island and does not bind any other federal, state, or local

prosecutive authorities.

     15.    This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between

the parties.    No other promises or inducements have been made

concerning the plea in this case.      Defendant acknowledges that no
   Case 1:06-cr-00130-S-LDA   Document 28     Filed 02/20/2007   Page 10 of 10



person has, directly or indirectly, threatened or coerced

Defendant to enter this agreement.          Any additions, deletions, or

modifications to this agreement must be made in writing and signed

by all the parties in order to be effective.

     16,   Counsel for Defendant states that Counsel has read this

agreement, been given a copy of it for Counselts file, explained

it to Defendant, and states that to the best of Counsel8s

knowledge and belief, Defendant understands the agreement.

     17.   Defendant states that Defendant has read the agreement

or has had it read to Defendant, has discussed it with Defendant's

Counsel, understands it, and agrees to its provisions.




                                                2XalQ7
                                               Date
~ssistantu.S. Attorney


                                                   2 -2s % a 0 7
M~RYE. ROGERS                                  Date
Assistant U.S. Attorney
OCDETF Chief
