Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM    Document 16    Filed 09/02/2008   Page 1 of 21



                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                   FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA            :
                                    :
VS.                                 :              CR No.   08-cr-16S
                                    :
ANTHONY MANCINI                     :


                        MEMORANDUM IN SUPPORT OF
                   MOTION FOR SENTENCE CONSIDERATION


                             I.   INTRODUCTION

      Anthony Mancini respectfully submits this memorandum

to assist the Court in determining a sentence “sufficient

but not greater than necessary” to achieve the statutory

purposes      of    sentencing.    18     U.S.C.     §   3553(a)(2005).

Additionally, Mr. Murray submits this memorandum in support

of his Motion for Sentencing Consideration advocating for a

sentence outside the suggested guideline range.


                      II.   PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND


      On December 7, 2007, a criminal complaint was filed in

the United States District Court for the District of Rhode

Island, charging the defendant with, while being a licensed

dealer   of    firearms,    willfully     selling    firearms    without

noting in the records required to be kept by law, the name,



                                    1
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM        Document 16       Filed 09/02/2008     Page 2 of 21



age   and    place       of   residence      of    the    purchaser       of    the

firearms, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922 (b) (5) and 924

(a)(1)(D).


      On    that    same      date,    the   defendant       was     arrested     by

members of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.                          He

appeared before Magistrate Judge David L. Martin and was

released     on     $10,000.00         unsecured      bond     with      specific

conditions.         On   February      29,   2008,    the    defendant         again

appeared before Magistrate Judge Martin and was arraigned

on two counts of Willful Sale of Firearms by a Licensee

Without Proper Record Keeping, in violation of Title 18,

U.S.C. §§ 922(b)(5) and 924(a)(1)(D).                    The defendant signed

a Waiver of Indictment, entered a plea of not guilty, and

was released on the previously set bond and conditions.


      On    March    11,      2008,    the    defendant      appeared      before

United States District Judge William E. Smith, and plead

guilty to the two-count Criminal Information.                         Sentencing

is scheduled for September 5, 2008.



                    III.      SENTENCING CONSIDERATIONS

                                  A.    General

      In determining the appropriate sentence for a criminal

defendant, the Court is bound to consider the sentencing


                                         2
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM                   Document 16            Filed 09/02/2008          Page 3 of 21



factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).                                                The statute

requires the Court to consider the nature and circumstances

of the offense and the history and characteristics of the

defendant, the kinds of sentences available, the need to

avoid unwarranted sentencing disparity, the need to provide

restitution, and the suggested guideline range.                                              18 U.S.C.

§ 3553(a)(1), (a)(3)-(7).                            The primary sentencing mandate

of § 3553(a) directs the sentencing court to impose the

minimally-sufficient                     sentence            to    achieve          the      statutory

purpose              of            punishment               –       justice,              deterrence,

incapacitation,                    and    rehabilitation:                    “The       court       shall

impose          a      sentence          sufficient,              but        not     greater          than

necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in [18

U.S.C.         §     3553(a)(2).]”                 18       U.S.C.       §   3553(a)         (emphasis

added).1                This        provision,              the     so       called        “parsimony

provision”,               is       the      umbrella            under        which        all       other

sentencing factors and considerations fall.                                           It represents

the ultimate goal of sentencing and reflects the maximum

sentence            that       a    court       may         impose.          United        States         v.

Denardi, 892 F.2d 269, 276-77 (3rd Cir. 1989) (Becker, J.,
1
    The statute provides, in pertinent part, that
    “the court consider the need for the sentence imposed-
           (A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and provide just
                punishment for the offense;
           (B) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;
           (C) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and
           (D) to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other
                correctional treatment in the most effective manner;”
    18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2) (2005).


                                                        3
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM     Document 16         Filed 09/02/2008    Page 4 of 21



concurring in part, dissenting in part).

     The   United      States     Supreme      Court   decision      in   United

States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005) rendered the Federal

Sentencing      Guidelines        advisory      rather     than      mandatory.

Instead of being bound by the Sentencing Guidelines, Booker

now “requires a court to consider Guideline ranges, . . .

but permits the court to tailor the sentence in light of

other statutory concerns as well, see § 3553(a).”                         Id. at

245-46.         Although     no    longer       mandatory,      the       Federal

Sentencing Guidelines are still a factor that the court

must consider in making the ultimate determination of the

appropriate sentence to impose in any criminal case.

     The   post    Booker    sentencing         process    mandated       by   the

First Circuit requires the District Court Judge to first

consult the guidelines – calculate the appropriate range

and then decide whether or not to exercise discretion and

sentence outside of the guideline range, United States v.

Jimenez,   440    F.3d     514,    518-519      (1st   Cir.   2006);      United

States v. Thurston, 456 F.3d 211, 215 (1st Cir. 2006).



                        B.   Personal Background

     The Presentence Investigation Report, Part C. Offender

Characteristics,       provides      a       comprehensive     and     accurate

history    of    Mr.    Mancini’s        background,      including        family


                                         4
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16    Filed 09/02/2008   Page 5 of 21



relations,   education,     employment,     and   criminal     history.

The undersigned defers to that report as it relates to this

information, and supplements the same below.

     As set forth in the Presentence Investigation Report,

Mr. Mancini is a well respected and loved member of his

family, friends and community.         Attached to this memorandum

is a plethora of letters of support submitted on behalf of

Mr. Mancini by friends and relatives.             As evident in the

excerpts below, these letters, without exception, reveal an

extraordinary level of support, respect and affection for a

man that has dedicated his life to his family, friends and

community,   has   suffered   severe     health   problems,    and   has

suffered extreme personal tragedy.          For example;

     Carol Mancini, the defendant’s wife writes,
     “Anthony has been through a great deal in his
     lifetime.   Bypass surgery, with many unforeseen
     complications, a pace maker, one stroke, an eye
     stroke, skin cancer and the most important in the
     death of his son Keith in the Station Fire.” . . .
     Some years ago Anthony went to work for his
     cousin’s business, a landfill, so that he could
     keep his sons working at the store. What father
     or business man would do a thing like that . . .
     not many.   If that wasn’t enough, he took a job
     as a security guard . . . to supplement the
     income of the store.

     Laurette Joslyn, the defendant’s cousin writes,
     “Anthony’s present circumstances are the direct
     result of a most unfortunate lapse in judgment
     during one of the lowest ebbs in his lifetime.
     The embarrassment he has been enduring from these
     errors has weighed heavily upon him and his
     family and I am sure he deeply regrets these most


                                  5
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16   Filed 09/02/2008   Page 6 of 21



     unfortunate lapses. . .   I know Anthony to be a
     reliable, kind, most considerate and charitable
     individual who has helped numbers of people
     throughout his lifetime. Anthony has demonstrated
     exemplary dedication and responsibility to his
     family with endless support to his mom, who was
     widowed at a very early age, often acting as a
     surrogate father to his young siblings.    He did
     this   voluntarily  with   nary   a  whisper   of
     complaint.”

     Mary Lori Page writes, “He is an honest, kind and
     honorable man.”

     June Giannini writes, “He is an honest man . . .
     a man who has survived extreme trial and
     tribulations over these hard times . . . He has
     sponsored many youth organizations . . . a kind,
     giving man.”

     Detective Robert E. Miele, Providence Police
     Department, who has known the defendant for over
     thirty years writes, “In the past few years Mr.
     Mancini has had more than his share of turmoil in
     his personal and professional life, including the
     passing of his youngest son Keith in the tragic
     fire at the station night club. This event in my
     opinion may have had a tremendous effect upon Mr.
     Mancini’s judgment. . . . I have known and
     conducted business with Mr. Mancini for well over
     thirty years and during that time I have never
     observed Mr. Mancini ever break the law or
     condone this type of behavior.”

     Gail Ann Pomfrete writes, “Anthony Mancini is one
     of the most decent and honest men I have ever had
     the pleasure of having in my life. He is a fair
     man with a kind heart . . . On February 19, 1985
     he became my second father seeing me through some
     of the toughest times of my life.    He has never
     let me down and has never wavered, helping me
     raise and direct my sons through life by modeling
     great traits such as honestly, respect, dignity,
     pride, and integrity . . . he has sponsored
     numerous team sports, various activities, and
     organized annual fishing contests at a local lake
     for all the children in the neighborhood.      No


                                  6
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16   Filed 09/02/2008   Page 7 of 21



     child was ever left out. He supplied every child
     with bait and poles. . . Anthony Mancini has
     worked hard every day of his life . . . He is
     seventy-two, he has overcome heart problems with
     surgery, robbery, the loss of his partner, who
     was his brother, and most importantly the loss of
     his son who perished in the Station Fire. . . . I
     can’t think of anyone else who has given more of
     themselves to everyone as he has. . . From his
     example, I have learned to be honest and have
     learned to stand up for what I believe in.      I
     believe in him.”

     Christine Wright writes, “He is always there to
     lend a hand when needed. He is honest, kind and
     admirable person.”

     Janet Mancini writes, “Don’t judge Anthony on his
     one mistake. He truly is a good person.”

     Richard Mancini writes, “I have known Tony for
     over 50 years and know him to be of good moral
     character, honest and trustworthy. A good father
     and   husband.       A   hard    worker  and   a
     gentleman. . . . I know that Tony is sorry for
     his mistake and I implore you to be lenient on
     Tony and look at all the good he has done over
     his lifetime.”

     Shirley A. Dowswell writes, “Mr. Mancini has
     proven to be a compassionate, caring person with
     a high moral standing in his everyday life.    I
     know that if a situation should ever arise
     requiring assistance in any form, Anthony would
     be the first to volunteer his help and go beyond
     any expectations”

     Lucy Ciccrelli, the defendant’s sister, writes,
     “My brother, Anthony Mancini, has always been an
     honest, hardworking person, and he ran his
     business the same way. He has always been there
     for all his family, whether it was due to a death
     or a sickness, even though he has serious health
     problems of his own.”

     Claire Mancini, the defendant’s sister-in-law,
     writes, “Anthony Mancini is honest, decent and


                                  7
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16   Filed 09/02/2008   Page 8 of 21



     trustworthy. . . He is     a quiet man, full of
     heart who cares about others and is ready with a
     helping hand when necessary. . . Anthony is a
     good man, please take this into consideration as
     you decide his fate.”

     Paul C. Ciccarelli, the defendant’s nephew,
     writes, “As a young man, my uncle served his
     country by joining the army and is a veteran of
     the Korean war era.     He is a devoted husband,
     father and grandfather. I have come to depend on
     him to provide support and comfort to my mother,
     his sister Lucy Ciccarelli, as my job keeps me
     away from Rhode Island.     He is a man I have
     admired and looked up to from an early age and
     the admiration continues today.”

     Anne Hunter, the defendant’s sister writes, “This
     letter is in reference to Anthony Mancini, whom I
     have known all my life.    In fact, he has been a
     positive role model and influence throughout my
     life.   Anthony is a very quiet and peace loving
     man.   He has helped me through a divorce from a
     physically and mentally abusive man, standing at
     my side through out the court proceedings and
     counseling me to stay calm and patient; that all
     would work out for the best.     During that same
     time, he brought bags of groceries to my home
     every week to ensure that I and my young children
     would have food on our table. . . . He is a man
     of integrity and is well respected by family,
     friends and members of the community. . . Please
     consider all the facts of this case and the
     character of a man, whose livelihood and well
     being have already been negatively impacted.”

     Cecelia Cairone, the defendant’s sister-in-law,
     writes, “As my brother-in-law and friend I can
     contest that he is an honest, loving, generous
     and reliable man.    He is the type of man that
     would take his shirt off his back to help someone
     in need.    He is a great husband, father and
     professional business owner.   To have this type
     of stress at his age of 72 is unbearable. He has
     had many tragedies in his life. The most recent
     the loss of his son in the Station Fire.    I ask



                                  8
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16   Filed 09/02/2008   Page 9 of 21



     to Court to please be lenient with the decision
     that is being made.”

     Norman Couturier writes, “At all times I have
     found Anthony to be honest and straightforward.
     Everyone   who  knows him, admires his quiet
     unassuming character, but knows that Anthony
     would always be there for anyone who required
     help.    I can not think of any individual more
     deserving of your compassion and understanding.”

     Denise Ferris, the defendant’s niece writes,
     “I’ve known Anthony all my life, as he is my
     father’s brother. . . . He is known, as well as
     liked in the community and is dedicated to his
     family, friends and career. . . . despite the
     tragedies and illnesses my uncle has endured in
     his lifetime, he has managed to maintain his
     sense of pride and dignity.    No matter what his
     circumstances,   he   has  always   made  himself
     available to anyone who needs him.”

     Maria Pimental, the defendant’s niece-in-law,
     writes, “I have known Anthony Mancini for over 15
     years.   I am his niece through marriage.    I can
     confirm that he is a man of great integrity and
     is extremely dedicated to his family and work.
     He has been there for me, as well as my siblings,
     especially when my father passed away.      He has
     always been generous and willing to help out.”

     John   Parrillo,  a   childhood   friend  of   the
     defendant’s son Keith, writes, “This man is
     dedicated    to   my    mother,    his   children,
     stepchildren, family and his business and would
     never hurt anyone.   He has been through a great
     deal in the past few years, he has had by-pass
     surgery with complications, a pacemaker, two
     strokes, and hearing loss.    Besides the loss of
     his youngest son to the Station Fire. One would
     think that would be enough for one lifetime and
     yet he asks for nothing and complains about
     nothing. He always comes second. . . . There is
     no one that knows him that doesn’t have respect
     for the man.”




                                  9
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM      Document 16       Filed 09/02/2008    Page 10 of 21



       Vincent Mancini, the defendant’s nephew, writes,
       “My uncle is a loving and caring father and has
       instilled the importance of respect and valuing
       family.   I will always see my uncle as a figure
       of knowledge, support and fortitude.     He has
       shown the importance of hard work and dedication
       in order to achieve the best for oneself and
       others.   His son Keith perished in the Station
       Club fire. He was working that night and was at
       the exit when he turned around to assist others.
       The unselfishness of putting himself in peril is
       the direct result of how his dad raised him.   I
       take pride in values and morals that I live by
       and will continue to aspire to live by the
       examples my uncle has set before me.”

       Joanne Parillo writes, “My daughter Jamie said it
       best when she said, ‘Grandpa Anthony is nice and
       very caring to people.’”



                                C. DISCUSSION

       In the Presentence Investigation Report, the Office of

the    Probation    Officer    determined       that    the   Total      Offense

Level for the instant matter as a Level 12, and that the

defendant    has    zero   criminal         history   points,      which    is   a

Criminal History Category of I, resulting in a guideline

range of 10-16 months.          According to § 5C1.1(d), this range

falls within Zone C of the sentencing table, which sets

forth    that   a   minimum     term    may     be    satisfied     by     (1)   a

sentence of imprisonment; or (2) a sentence of imprisonment

that includes a term of supervised release with a condition

that    substitutes   community confinement or home detention

according to the schedule in subsection (e), provided that


                                       10
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM                     Document 16             Filed 09/02/2008            Page 11 of 21



at       least        one      half       of     the      minimum         term       is     satisfied              by

imprisonment.                   The defendant, however, as set forth below,

hereby moves for a downward departure or in the alternative

a sentence variance, such that the court shall have the

discretion               to      sentence           the        defendant          to      some       form          of

punishment other than incarceration.


                                          a. Downward Departure

            The      Federal          Sentencing            Guidelines             §5K2.20         (Aberrant

Behavior)              provides          for      a    downward           departure            based          on    a

showing that the conduct for which the defendant engaged

constitutes aberrant behavior, which is inconsistent with

his character.                   Specifically, §5K2.20 provides in pertinent

part as follows:


             (a) IN GENERAL . . . a downward departure may be
            warranted in an exceptional case if (1) the
            defendant’s    criminal    conduct    meets    the
            requirements of subsection (b); and (2) the
            departure is not prohibited under subsection (c)2.

            (b) REQUIREMENTS. — The court may depart downward
            under this policy statement only if the defendant
            committed a single criminal occurrence or single
            criminal transaction that (1) was committed
            without significant planning; (2) was of limited
            duration; and (3) represents a marked deviation
            by the defendant from an otherwise law-abiding
            life.


                                     i.        “Exceptional Case”

2
    There is no indication in this case that any of the factors set forth in subsection (c) are applicable.


                                                          11
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM        Document 16               Filed 09/02/2008      Page 12 of 21



      The circuit courts do not clearly set forth a criteria

for     determining          whether        a         case      is        considered       an

“exceptional         case”    pursuant       to       §5K2.20.            The     defendant

asserts,        however,       that     the           facts        and     circumstances

surrounding the instant case warrant a finding that it is

an exceptional case.            By all accounts, the defendant is an

exceptional person. The plethora of accolades contained in

the   attached        letters    evidence             a     life     of    selflessness,

sacrifice and tragedy.               Through honorable wartime military

service    and      selfless    support          for       immediate        and     extended

family and friends, the defendant has established himself

as an exceptional person.               Moreover, in light of his many

serious health problems and personal tragedy, such as the

recent loss of his son in the Station Fire, the defendant

comes   before        this   court     as        a    person       that     has    suffered

exceptional         tragedy.    It     is        an       exceptional        case    for    a

defendant to come before the court at the age of seventy-

two without ever having faced a criminal charge, and after

operating       a   business    for    thirty-five              years       without    ever

facing any type of sanction or violation.

      Accordingly, the instant case clearly falls within the

classification of an “exceptional case” pursuant to §5K2.20.


          ii.       Subsection b(1) – “was committed without
                           significant planning”


                                            12
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM          Document 16        Filed 09/02/2008        Page 13 of 21




       There is no indication that the defendant engaged in

any planning whatsoever, with respect to the conduct that

gave rise to the instant charges.                     The charges against the

defendant       were      borne     solely      as    a    result       of     a   sting

operation by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

There       exists   no    evidence      that        the   defendant          took      any

affirmative action or planned the commission of any crime.

He    was    solicited      by     federal      authorities         acting         in   an

undercover capacity and merely acquiesced to the request of

undercover members of law enforcement.

       Accordingly, subsection b(1) is satisfied.



           iii. Subsection b(2) – “was of limited duration”

       The alleged conduct occurred over the course of two

dates.       The defendant’s admitted conduct was the sale of

three of firearms to ATF Agent Borysevicz on two dates, to

wit, November 9, 2007 and December 5, 2007.                                  This time

frame is clearly of limited duration.

       Accordingly, subsection b(2) is satisfied.



     iv.    Subsection b(3) – “deviation by the defendant from
                    an otherwise law-abiding life”

       It is undisputed that prior to the instant case the

defendant had never been arrested, charged or convicted of


                                         13
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM          Document 16          Filed 09/02/2008     Page 14 of 21



a criminal offense.               He has held a federal license to sell

firearms       for    thirty-five years, has operated Continental

Firearms for the same period of time, and has never had any

issues with respect to either his license or the operation

of his business.            Additionally, as is evident from the many

letters in support, he is a dedicated family man, loyal

friend, and respected member of the community.                                  He is an

honorably       discharged        veteran       of    the     United    States      Army,

where he attained the rank of sergeant, and served eighteen

months in the Korea War.                 He has raised a loving family, is

a    beloved    grandfather and uncle, and appears to be the

patriarch of his family.                  The above referenced letters of

support       repeat       the    common    theme        of     his    dedication       to

family, friends and community.                        His friends and family,

without       exception,         extol     his       virtues     as    a   person       of

integrity and generosity.                 He is repeatedly described as a

person that “would give you the shirt off his back”.                                    He

has    been     supportive        of     family      members      during        difficult

times,      such      as    his    sister’s          divorce     from      an     abusive

husband, wherein in addition to moral support, he provided

groceries to ensure that his sister’s family “had food on

the table”.          This was in the context of a life within which

he    did   not      earn   much    money,       and     held    numerous        jobs   in

addition to running Continental Arms to support his own


                                           14
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM       Document 16           Filed 09/02/2008       Page 15 of 21



family, but still managed to help other family members in

need.

       As is evident from the attached letters of support,

with the exception of the instant matter, the defendant has

led an exemplary law-abiding life.                      Clearly satisfying the

requirements Subsection b(3).

       As set forth above, this matter clear satisfies the

requirements        of     §5K2.20.        Accordingly,          the         defendant

respectfully        requests      that    this       Honorable       Court      make     a

finding     that     the    defendant’s          acts       constitute        Aberrant

Behavior      pursuant      to      §5K2.20,          and    grant      a     downward

departure      of    six    (6)     offense          levels,    resulting          in    a

guideline      offense     level     of        six    (6).      This        degree      of

departure will allow the court to sentence the defendant to

a   term      of    probation,       community          confinement           or    home

detention.

                             b. Variance Sentence

    In the alternative, the defendant respectfully requests

that    the     Court      impose     a        non-guideline         sentence,          in

consideration of the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553.

In United States v. Hillyer, 457 F.3d 347 (4th Cir. 2006),

the court stated as follows:


       We have previously outlined the steps a district
       court must take in arriving at a sentence after


                                          15
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM       Document 16       Filed 09/02/2008   Page 16 of 21



      United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 S.Ct.
      738, 160 L.Ed.2d 621 (2005):
      First, the court must correctly determine, after
      making   appropriate   findings     of   fact,   the
      applicable guideline range. Next, the court must
      determine whether a sentence within that range
      serves the factors set forth in [18 U.S.C.] §
      3553(a) and, if not, select a sentence within
      statutory limits that does serve those factors.
      In doing so, the district court should first look
      to whether a departure is appropriate based on
      the Guidelines Manual or relevant case law. . . .
      If an appropriate basis for departure exists, the
      district court may depart. If the resulting
      departure range still does not serve the factors
      set forth in § 3553(a), the court may then elect
      to impose a non-guideline sentence (a "variance
      sentence"). The district court must articulate
      the    reasons   for     the    sentence    imposed,
      particularly explaining any departure or variance
      from the guideline range.         United States v.
      Moreland, 437 F.3d 424, 432 (4th Cir.2006)
      (alterations,   internal    quotation   marks,   and
      citations omitted).

Title 18, Chapter 227, § 3553 (a) sets forth the factors to

be considered in imposing sentences as follows, “The court

shall impose a sentence sufficient, but not greater than

necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in

paragraph (2) of this subsection.                The court, in

determining the particular sentence to be imposed, shall

consider, the following:


         (1)     the nature and circumstances of the offense and
                 the history and characteristics of the
                 defendant.

      With respect to the nature and circumstances of the

offense,       the   instant   matter        involves   a   sting   operation,


                                        16
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM      Document 16    Filed 09/02/2008     Page 17 of 21



wherein members of law enforcement initiated the conduct in

which the defendant engaged, which resulted in his instant

conviction of a Class D felony.             The defendant did not deal

directly with any member of the public, no member of the

public      illegally     took   possession        of   any     firearms    or

ammunition as a result of the defendant’s conduct, and no

firearms     or     ammunition   entered     the    stream      of   commerce

without proper documentation.

      With respect to the characteristics of the defendant,

as   set    forth    above,    but   for    the    instant    conduct,     the

defendant has led an exemplary, selfless, and law-abiding

life.


 (2) the need for sentence imposed –

      (A)to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
          promote respect for the law, and to provide just
          punishment for the offense:
      (B)to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;
      (C)to protect the public from further crimes of the
          defendant; and
      (D) to provide the defendant with the needed educational
          or vocational training, medical care, or other
          correctional treatment in the most effective manner;

      The     defendant     recognizes      the     seriousness      of    the

offense by virtue of the fact that at the age of seventy-

two, as a result of his conducted, he will for the rest of

his life be a convicted felon.              He has been a law-abiding

citizen for seventy-two years, and as set forth above, the



                                     17
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM    Document 16      Filed 09/02/2008      Page 18 of 21



instant conduct was an aberration within an otherwise law-

abiding life.       Considering the course of the instant matter

that has resulted in the defendant being arrested, charged

and convicted of a felony, and facing sentencing, in light

of the evidence of his character, there is no reason to

believe that he would ever again show a lack of respect for

the law.      With respect to adequate punishment, as a result

of    his    conviction,    the    defendant      can   never      possess    a

firearm or ammunition again.              Accordingly, he has lost his

license to be a firearm dealer and had lost the ability to

engage in the type of business in which he has been engaged

for   most    of   his   adult    life.      He   has   had   to    face   the

embarrassment of a very public arrest, with dozens of ATF

agents storming his store.                He has had to transfer his

firearm and ammunition inventory to other firearms dealers

for sale, undoubtedly resulting in the disclosure to his

colleagues of his legal problems, not to mention that fact

that his arrest was published in the Providence Journal.

       Accordingly,      there exists definite deterrence as to

the defendant ensuring his future compliance with the law.

Additionally, the public nature of the disclosure of his

arrest and conviction, and resulting lifetime loss of his

vocation, will certainly act as a deterrent for any other

firearm dealer in the community.


                                     18
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM        Document 16        Filed 09/02/2008        Page 19 of 21



       With respect to the commission of future crimes by the

defendant,      prior    to   the    instant       case    the       defendant     had

never    been     arrest,     charged,        or    convicted         of    a   crime.

Considering all that he has lost and suffered as a result

of this case, there is no reason to believe he would ever

again engage in criminal conduct.                    Moreover, with respect

to the instant case, as a result of his conviction the

defendant will never again be able to be a firearms dealer,

or    even   possess      a   firearm        or    ammunition.             Therefore,

notwithstanding the fact that the defendant has suffered as

a result of this case, there is virtually no occasion for

him to ever engage in similar conduct in the future.

       With respect to the need for educational or vocational

training,    medical      care, or other correctional treatment,

these factors simply do not apply to this defendant.                                 At

the age of seventy-two, the defendant is a recipient of

social security, he still has the bait and tackle aspect of

his    business    to    run,    and    therefore         is   in     no    need   for

educational       or    vocational        training.            With    respect       to

medical care, as set forth herein, the defendant suffers

from    numerous       medical conditions, i.e., cardiac disease,

high    blood     pressure,       etc.,      for    which       he    takes      daily

medication and seeks regular medical attention.                              Any form




                                        19
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16         Filed 09/02/2008    Page 20 of 21



of incarceration would only serve to complicate his very

fragile medical conditions.

      Accordingly, in consideration of the factors set forth

in 18 U.S.C. § 3553, the defendant respectfully requests

that this Honorable Court impose a sentence in variance of

the guideline level of twelve (12), as set forth in the

Presentence Investigation Report.



                              CONCLUSION

      As    set    forth   above,        the    defendant         respectfully

requests    that    this    Honorable          Court   depart       from   the

sentencing guideline level of twelve (12), as set forth in

the   Presentence    Investigation Report.              Specifically, the

defendant     requests     that   this         Court    depart      downward,

pursuant to §5K2.20 on the grounds of aberrant behavior, by

six (6) offense levels to a guideline level of six (6), and

impose a sentence of less than incarceration.

      In the alternative, the defendant requests that this

Honorable Court impose a sentence pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §

3553, deviate from the sentencing level of 12 as set forth

in the Presentence Investigation Report.                Specifically, for

the reasons set forth herein, the defendant respectfully

requests that this Honorable Court impose a sentence of

less than incarceration.


                                    20
Case 1:08-cr-00016-S-DLM   Document 16   Filed 09/02/2008   Page 21 of 21




                             ANTHONY MANCINI
                             By his attorney,




                             /s/ Albert E. Medici, Jr., Esq.
                             MEDICI & SCIACCA, P.C.
                             1312 Atwood Avenue
                             Johnston, Rhode Island 02919
                             Telephone 401-946-3910
                             Facsimile 401-942-4918
                             amedici@medicisciacca.com




                            CERTIFICATION

      I, hereby, certify that I electronically filed and

served a copy of the within on Stephen Dambruch, Assistant

United States Attorney on the 2nd day of September, 2008.



                             /s/ Albert E. Medici, Jr., Esq.




                                  21
