       Case 1:03-cr-00087-T         Document 39        Filed 09/26/2007       Page 1 of 7



                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                               DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                     :
                                             :
               v.                            :       CR No. 03-87T
                                             :
JEFFREY ROLLINS                              :


                           REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

Lincoln D. Almond, United States Magistrate Judge


       This matter has been referred to me pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) and 18 U.S.C. §

3401(i) for proposed findings of fact concerning whether the Defendant is in violation of the terms

of his supervised release and, if so, to recommend a disposition of this matter. In compliance with

that directive and in accordance with 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e) and Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1, a revocation

hearing was held on September 21, 2007. The Government presented five witnesses at the

revocation hearing. Two Providence Police Patrol Officers, two Providence Police Detectives and

Defendant’s Probation Officer testified. Defendant, through counsel, cross examined each of the

Government’s witnesses but offered no witnesses or other evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion

of the hearing, I ordered Defendant released pending my final Report and Recommendation which

would recommend dismissal of this revocation case.

                                          Background

       On July 3, 2007, the Probation Office petitioned the Court for the issuance of a summons for

the Defendant’s appearance to answer a supervised release violation charge. On July 10, 2007, the
        Case 1:03-cr-00087-T             Document 39          Filed 09/26/2007          Page 2 of 7



District Court ordered the issuance of a summons as requested in the petition.1 Defendant appeared

in Court on July 26, 2007 for an initial appearance and was released pending a final supervised

release revocation hearing. On September 10, 2007, the Government filed an amended violation

report and requested a warrant for Defendant’s arrest. On September 11, 2007, the District Court

ordered the issuance of a summons. Defendant appeared pursuant to the summons on September

12, 2007 and was detained pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1(a)(6) pending a final revocation

hearing. A revocation hearing was ultimately held on September 21, 2007, and Defendant contested

the following charges:

                 While on supervision, the defendant shall not commit another
                 federal, state, or local crime.

                 On August 4, 2007, the offender committed the offense of Felony
                 Assault as evidenced by a warrant and petition filed by the
                 Providence Police Department on August 17, 2007 and subsequent
                 charges in Sixth Division District Court under case number 62-2007-
                 13717.

                 While on supervision, the defendant shall not commit another
                 federal, state, or local crime.

                 On June 8, 2007, the offender committed the offense of Simple
                 Assault as evidenced by his arrest by the Providence Police
                 Department and subsequent charges in Sixth Division District Court
                 under case number 61-2007-09096.

                                                 Discussion

        The initial Petition arose out of Defendant’s arrest in the early morning hours of June 8, 2007

for simple assault. The Providence Police were responding to a shots fired call in the Atwells

Avenue area. Defendant allegedly ran from police into 746 Atwells Avenue and slammed the door


       1
         This summons tolled the expiration of Defendant’s supervised release term which was scheduled to expire
on August 24, 2007. See 18 U.S.C. § 3583(i).

                                                      -2-
        Case 1:03-cr-00087-T         Document 39         Filed 09/26/2007        Page 3 of 7



on the arm of a police officer. This is a Grade C violation, and the sentencing guideline range is five

to eleven months. On September 5, 2007, the simple assault was dismissed by the State pursuant

to an agreement whereby Defendant performed twenty hours of community service. Although the

violation based on the simple assault charge is still pending, the Government offered no evidence

regarding this charge at the revocation hearing.

       The Amended Petition arose out of a subsequent felony assault charge brought against

Defendant. The felony assault charge involved an early morning incident on August 4, 2007 in

which Defendant allegedly struck Luis Rivera in the head with a bottle. This is a Grade A violation,

and the sentencing guideline range is eighteen to twenty-four months. This incident also allegedly

occurred in the vicinity of 746 Atwells Avenue. Shortly after this alleged incident, Mr. Rivera and

a second victim, were shot in front of a house located at 36 Bergen Street in Providence which is

approximately one mile from 746 Atwells Avenue. The shots were allegedly fired from a gold car.

Although a gold car generally matching the description was located near 746 Atwells Avenue after

the shooting, no one has been charged in the shooting incident. At the revocation hearing, the

Government did not present the direct testimony of either Mr. Rivera, the victim of the alleged

felony assault; or Sergeant Glenn Cassidy, the Detective who interviewed Mr. Rivera regarding the

felony assault.

       The Government’s case centered on the shooting of Mr. Rivera and the investigation of that

shooting. However, Defendant has not been charged in that shooting. None of the officers provided

any direct evidence regarding the state felony assault charge pending against Defendant. The

Government sought to prove its case through three exhibits which were not allowed into evidence.

The first (Government Ex. 6 for identification) is a document entitled “Photo Lineup Instructions”


                                                   -3-
        Case 1:03-cr-00087-T         Document 39         Filed 09/26/2007        Page 4 of 7



dated August 7, 2007, and signed by Sergeant Cassidy and with the initials “L.R.” on the witness

signature line. The second (Government Ex. 7 for identification) is a document entitled “Witness

Statement” also dated August 7, 2007, and signed by Sergeant Cassidy and with the initials “LR”

on the witness signature line. The third (Government Ex. 8) is a document entitled “Photo Line-Up

Sheet” dated August 7, 2007, and noted to be prepared by Sergeant Cassidy and with the initials

“LR” below Defendant’s photo. The Government sought to introduce these documents in the

absence of both Mr. Rivera and Sergeant Cassidy to prove that Defendant assaulted Mr. Rivera with

a bottle. Defendant, through counsel, objected to admission of these exhibits as hearsay and as a

denial of his Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses.

       Hearsay evidence can be admissible in a supervised release revocation hearing. See Fed. R.

Evid. 1101(d)(3); United States v. Portalla, 985 F.2d 621, 622 (1st Cir. 1993) (holding that the “tests

of admissibility set forth in the Federal Rules of Evidence” are not applicable in revocation hearings

but that evidence that does not satisfy those rules “must nonetheless be reliable”); see also United

States v. Lowenstein, 108 F.3d 80, 83 (6th Cir. 1997) (supervised release violation finding may rest

upon reliable hearsay). Rule 32.1(b)(1)(B)(iii), Fed. R. Crim. P., provides a defendant with the

opportunity to question an adverse witness “unless the judge determines that the interest of justice

does not require the witness to appear.” In United States v. Rondeau, 430 F.3d 44, 47-48 (1st Cir.

2005), the First Circuit held that a supervised release revocation hearing is not a “criminal

prosecution” triggering a confrontation right. However, it concluded that a defendant in such a case

has a “limited confrontation right” under Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1 which requires the court to balance

the defendant’s “right to confront witnesses with the government’s good cause for denying




                                                 -4-
         Case 1:03-cr-00087-T             Document 39            Filed 09/26/2007          Page 5 of 7



confrontation.” Id. at 48. In applying this balancing test, the court “should consider the reliability

of the hearsay testimony and the government’s reason for declining to produce the declarant.” Id.

        In this case, the Government failed to produce two declarants – Mr. Rivera and Sergeant

Cassidy.2 As to Mr. Rivera, the Government argued that Mr. Rivera’s failure to appear was the

result of fear because he was the victim of a physical assault and a shooting. The Government was

unable to locate Mr. Rivera to serve a subpoena on him. Defendant’s Probation Officer testified that

he spoke with Mr. Rivera by telephone on three occasions and, although he expressed concern for

his safety, Mr. Rivera said he would appear. He did not. As to Sergeant Cassidy, he was not

subpoenaed by the Government. The Government represented that he was notified of the hearing

but it had no explanation for his failure to appear other than that he was on “furlough.”

        Although the Government arguably presented good cause for failing to produce Mr. Rivera

as a witness, I did not reach that stage of the balancing process because the Government did not

present good cause for denying Defendant the right to confront Sergeant Cassidy. Sergeant Cassidy

apparently interviewed Mr. Rivera, prepared the witness statement and obtained Mr. Rivera’s

signature consisting of the initials “LR.” Sergeant Cassidy also prepared the six-picture photo array

used for the line-up identification of Defendant and obtained Mr. Rivera’s signature on the photo

line-up instruction sheet.

        Although it can be inferred, I have no evidentiary basis in the record upon which to conclude

that Mr. Rivera was the person who signed “LR” on the proposed exhibits. I also have no

evidentiary basis in the record upon which to conclude that Mr. Rivera voluntarily gave his


        2
          The Government made an oral motion for continuance, which was denied, at the close of its case. Since the
Government had no explanation for Sergeant Cassidy’s non-appearance, it was also unable to provide the Court with
good cause to justify a mid-stream continuance. The Government did not object to the September 21, 2007 hearing date
when it was offered by the Court and made no pre-hearing motion for continuance.

                                                        -5-
        Case 1:03-cr-00087-T         Document 39          Filed 09/26/2007       Page 6 of 7



statement in an atmosphere free from coercion or confusion. Finally, I have no evidentiary basis in

the record upon which to conclude that the photo array was prepared and presented to Mr. Rivera

by Sergeant Cassidy in an objective and non-suggestive manner. Detective David Girard testified

generally about the process used by the Providence Police Department for photo line-up

identifications and, although the process appears thorough and fair, it involves the exercise of some

discretion by the implementing officer, and I have no evidence as to how that process was followed

with Mr. Rivera. Although Detective Girard spoke with Mr. Rivera at the hospital shortly after the

shooting, there is no evidence that he spoke with Mr. Rivera about the felony assault at issue in this

case and no evidence that he was present during Sergeant Cassidy’s interview of Mr. Rivera or Mr.

Rivera’s photo line-up identification of Defendant.

       Without hearing directly from Sergeant Cassidy, it is impossible for this Court to pass on the

reliability of the hearsay evidence offered by the Government. See Government Exs. 6-8 for

identification. If Sergeant Cassidy testified and had been cross-examined, I would have been able

to determine if Mr. Rivera’s witness statement and photo line-up identification were reliable and to

then balance Defendant’s confrontation right with the Government’s reason for failing to present

direct testimony from Mr. Rivera. The Government is seeking to deny Defendant both the right to

confront the victim, Mr. Rivera, and the right to confront the investigating officer, Sergeant Cassidy.

If I were to permit the Government to proceed in this fashion, it would be able to prosecute similar

violation cases in the future simply by introducing police reports and other investigative documents

through a records custodian – a result which would plainly violate even the “limited confrontation

right” applicable in proceedings under Fed. R. Crim. P. 32.1.

                                             Conclusion


                                                 -6-
        Case 1:03-cr-00087-T         Document 39         Filed 09/26/2007        Page 7 of 7



       For the foregoing reasons, I find that the Government has not met its burden of proving the

charges against Defendant by a preponderance of the evidence and recommend that the District

Court dismiss, with prejudice, the violation charges pending against Defendant. I also recommend

that the District Court include in its Order a finding that Defendant’s tolled term of supervised

release is concluded.

       Any objection to this Report and Recommendation must be specific and must be filed with

the Clerk of Court within ten (10) days of its receipt. LR Cv 72; Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b). Failure to

file specific objections in a timely manner constitutes a waiver of the right to review by the District

Court and the right to appeal the District Court’s Decision. United States v. Valencia-Copete, 792

F.2d 4 (1st Cir. 1986); Park Motor Mart, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 616 F.2d 603 (1st Cir. 1980).



 /s/ Lincoln D. Almond
LINCOLN D. ALMOND
United States Magistrate Judge
September 26, 2007




                                                 -7-
