                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

                                   DISTRICT OF MAINE


 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                       )
                                                )
 V.                                             )
                                                )
 DANIEL EASLER,                                 )   1:19-CR-00049-LEW
                                                )
                       Defendant                )


                          DECISION AND ORDER ON
                      DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS

        Defendant Daniel Easler is indicted as a felon in possession of firearms and

ammunition in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(1) and 924(a)(2). Indictment (ECF No.

5). Easler moves to suppress evidence gathered from his person on the night of December

4, 2018. Mot. Suppress 1 (ECF No. 26). A hearing on the motion was held on June 24,

2019.    After careful consideration of the evidence and the arguments of counsel,

Defendant’s motion to suppress is DENIED.

                                     BACKGROUND

        On the evening of December 4, 2018, the Caribou Police Department received a call

from a citizen who reported witnessing a GMC pickup suddenly veer off the road and into

a snow bank. The citizen indicated that when he pulled over to assist, the driver (who was

later identified as Defendant Easler) approached his car and asked for a ride, saying: “I

need to get out of here.” Because Easler was “acting odd” and “something seemed off,”

the citizen declined to give Easler a ride. Easler went back to his truck and the citizen (who

remained at the scene) did not see him again.
           Eric Depner, an officer with the Caribou Police Department, arrived at the scene

approximately 15 minutes later and observed the GMC pickup stuck in a snowbank, but

was unable to locate Easler. Officer Depner then identified a fresh set of footprints in the

snow and followed the footprints past a nearby apartment building, into the surrounding

woods, and then through a potato field. When his flashlight malfunctioned, Officer Depner

called for backup and returned to the GMC pickup. Officer Depner reported that it was

extremely cold that evening.

           Sergeant Keith Ouellette 1 arrived on the scene and while Officer Depner directed

traffic near the GMC pickup, Sergeant Ouellette followed the footprints. Based on the

trajectory of the footprints, Sergeant Ouellette directed Officer Depner to an area where he

anticipated Easler may be located. Officer Depner drove his police cruiser to the general

area indicated by Sergeant Ouellette, got out of his cruiser, and found Easler lying face

down in the snow with his hands above his head. Officer Depner instructed Easler to his

feet. After Easler stood up, Officer Depner observed a shotgun on Easler’s person hanging

from a sling. Officer Depner drew his gun, directed Easler to the roadway, ordered him to

the ground, and updated dispatch.                  Officer Depner noted that Easler matched the

description provided by the citizen.

           Officer Ouellette and Officer Gerard Lemoine arrived on the scene, secured Easler

by handcuffing him, and then searched him. In addition to the loaded pump-action shotgun

visible on Easler’s body, this search revealed a loaded Highpoint brand 9-mm handgun, a

drug kit, a clear bag which the officers believed contained methamphetamine, a set of

1
    Sergeant Ouellette was an officer at the time of this interaction.
                                                         2
handcuffs, and a methamphetamine pipe. At all times Easler refused to identify himself.

The officers formally arrested Easler and brought him to the police station.

          At the police station, Easler continued to refuse to identify himself. Police officers

then used a fingerprint scanner and identified him as Daniel Easler.               During this

identification process, the officers learned that Easler was a felon whose driver’s license

had been revoked and who had several outstanding warrants and sets of bail conditions.

Officers also learned that the handgun discovered on Easler’s person had been reported as

stolen.

                                         DISCUSSION

          In support of his motion to suppress Easler advances two arguments. First, he argues

that the officers did not have a “reasonable, articulable suspicion of criminal activity at the

time of the search” as required by the Fourth Amendment. Mot. Suppress, ¶ 7. Second,

he asserts that even if the stop was initially lawful and officers could articulate a reasonable

suspicion of criminal activity, the stop nevertheless evolved into a de facto arrest

unsupported by probable cause, as evidenced by “the method and circumstances of the

detention . . . at the time of the search and seizure.” Id. ¶ 8, 10-11. I will address each

argument in turn.

I.        TERRY STOPS

          The Fourth Amendment guarantees the “right of the people to be secure in their

persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures.” U.S.

CONST. amend. IV. When an officer temporarily detains an individual, they effectuate a

“seizure” that necessarily implicates the Fourth Amendment. United States v. Romain, 393

                                                3
F.3d 63, 70-71 (1st Cir. 2004). However, a temporary detention, also known as a “Terry

stop,” is not violative of a defendant’s constitutional rights if the stop is “based on a

reasonable suspicion that criminal activity may be afoot.” United States v. Rabbia, 699

F.3d 85, 89 (1st Cir. 2012); see also Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22 (1968) (“[A] a police

officer may in appropriate circumstances and in an appropriate manner approach a person

for purposes of investigating possibly criminal behavior even though there is no probable

cause to make an arrest.”). When evaluating a Terry stop, courts consider whether an

officer reasonably suspected criminal activity before engaging with the individual – in

other words, whether the stop was “justified at its inception” – and whether, as the stop

progressed, the officer’s actions were “reasonably related in scope to the circumstances

which justified the interference.” United States v. Pontoo, 666 F.3d 20, 26 (1st Cir. 2011)

(quoting United States v. Acosta–Colon, 157 F.3d 9, 14 (1st Cir. 1998)).

       A.     Reasonable Suspicion

       The lynchpin of the first inquiry, reasonable articulable suspicion, requires “more

than a naked hunch that a particular person may be engaged in some illicit activity,” but

yet “does not require either probable cause or evidence of a direct connection linking the

suspect to the suspected crime.” United States v. Chhien, 266 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2001); see

also United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7 (1989) (“The officer, of course, must be able

to articulate something more than an ‘inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or hunch.’”

(quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 27)). In addition to an officer’s own observations, information

provided by onlookers may form the basis of reasonable suspicion if “the information

carrie[s] enough indicia of reliability.” Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 147 (1972).

                                             4
Whether an officer’s suspicions are based on his or her observations, information provided

by a third party, or some combination thereof, courts assess the reasonableness of the

officer’s suspicions     through “broad-based consideration of             all the attendant

circumstances.” Chhien, 266 F.3d at 6 (citing Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 500 (1983)).

       Easler asserts that while his behavior may be “considered by some to be odd,” none

of his actions – which he characterizes as “[m]oving one’s vehicle to the side of a

roadway,” “walking through the woods and into a field,” and “openly carrying a firearm”

– are, in themselves, criminal activities. Mot. Suppress ¶ 7. Ultimately, he argues that

because “it is impossible to distinguish from the reports what crime the police were

investigating and the police never indicated what criminal activity they suspected in their

reports prior to the search,” the responding officers are somehow foreclosed from

articulating a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity to justify this Terry stop. Id.

Easler’s argument misconstrues both the legal standard and the record.

       To withstand constitutional scrutiny, officers need not accurately point to a specific

crime before conducting a Terry stop. See Pontoo, 666 F.3d at 28 (“In carrying out

a Terry stop, a police officer is not required to possess the clarity of vision that arises only

in hindsight.”); see also United States v. Guardado, 699 F.3d 1220, 1224 (10th Cir. 2012)

(“Terry demands suspicion not certainty”); United States v. Bonilla, 357 F. App’x 693, 703

(6th Cir. 2009) (“It is well-settled that reasonable suspicion that ‘criminal activity may be

afoot’ does not require suspicion of a specific crime, but rather criminal activity in general.”

(quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 30)). Instead, the standard requires only a “particularized and

objective basis for suspecting the person stopped of criminal activity, rooted firmly ‘in

                                               5
specific and articulable facts.’” United States v. Brake, 666 F.3d 800, 804 (1st Cir. 2011)

(quoting Pontoo, 666 F.3d at 28); see also United States v. Pack, 612 F.3d 341, 356 (5th

Cir.), opinion modified on denial of reh’g, 622 F.3d 383 (5th Cir. 2010) (“While the

[Supreme] Court clearly requires the police to be able to articulate a ‘particularized . . .

basis’ for suspecting wrongdoing, it has often spoken of the wrongdoing itself in general

terms. . . . Requiring police to have particularized facts that support a finding that ‘criminal

activity may be afoot’ is different from requiring the police to articulate particularized facts

that support a finding that a particular specific crime is afoot” (citations omitted)).

          When viewed holistically, the circumstances of the day could certainly lead a

reasonably prudent officer to suspect criminal activity. Prior to any direct interaction with

Easler, a sufficiently reliable source 2 informed officers that Easler’s vehicle had

“suddenly” drifted off the road and come to a stop upon a snowbank and then Easler had

demanded help in ineluctably suspicious terms: “I need to get out of here.” This third-

party emphasized that Easler had acted “odd” when asking for a ride and then, once his

demand was denied, disappeared from the scene. See Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119,

124 (2000) (“Our cases have also recognized that nervous, evasive behavior is a pertinent

factor in determining reasonable suspicion. Headlong flight – wherever it occurs – is the

consummate act of evasion: It is not necessarily indicative of wrongdoing, but it is certainly


2
    The citizen’s report demonstrated sufficient indicia of reliability as the citizen identified himself, sought
    immediate police assistance, contemporaneously notified the police of what he personally observed,
    remained at the scene and participated in further discussion with the police, and provided an accurate
    description of Easler. See, e.g., Adams, 407 U.S. at 146-47 (relying on a similar set of considerations as
    “enough indicia of reliability”); see also United States v. Aviles-Vega, 783 F.3d 69, 75 (1st Cir. 2015)
    (finding that an anonymous caller’s tip was sufficiently reliable due to “the eyewitness basis of knowledge
    and the contemporaneous nature of the tip”). Importantly, the citizen’s report was corroborated by the
    police officers’ own observations, especially regarding Easler’s apparent desire to flee the scene.
                                                         6
suggestive of such.” (internal citations omitted)). Easler was then found in a nearby field

lying on the ground, in the snow, with a shotgun clearly visible on his person. Although

none of Easler’s actions, standing alone, may have been obviously criminal, the citizen’s

description of Easler’s demeanor coupled with Easler’s erratic, evasive, and – to coin the

phrase utilized by the Terry Court – “unusual” conduct throughout the evening nevertheless

provided a sufficient factual basis to support the officers’ suspicion of criminal activity.

See, e.g., Terry, 392 U.S. at 30 (permitting a Terry stop when “a police officer observes

unusual conduct which leads him reasonably to conclude in light of his experience that

criminal activity may be afoot” (emphasis added)); see also Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 125-26

(noting that even when a defendant’s suspicious conduct is “by itself lawful,” Terry permits

law enforcement officers to conduct a Terry stop to “resolve the ambiguity” and “briefly

investigate further”).

       Contrary to Defendant’s assertions, a reasonable articulable suspicion is not

undermined by alternative theories for unusual conduct, however plausible those theories

might be. See, e.g., Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 125-26. In other words, it is always possible

that the basis for an officer’s suspicion may be dispelled upon further investigation but that

does not, standing alone, undermine the constitutional propriety of the stop in the first

instance. However, in this case, nothing was discovered upon further investigation that

dispelled the basis for the stop or called into question its scope. As in most of life, context

matters. Atomized into its component parts and blinkered to all of the other component

parts, Easler argues that it is his prerogative to park his truck on a snowbank, express his

urgent desire to “get out of here,” and to walk through the fields and woods at night in near

                                              7
zero-degree temperatures. It is, likewise, his right to open carry while sojourning through

the lustrous winter wonderland of an Aroostook County night to lie in repose in a field on

a fresh bed of snow. However, when those expressions of individual liberty are quilted

together, the tapestry reveals that the law enforcement officers’ suspicion was based on

something far north of a hunch. The stop was justified as having been based on a

reasonable articulable suspicion.

       B.     Scope of the Stop

       When police subject an individual to a Terry stop based on a reasonable suspicion

of criminal activity, the extent of the officer’s intrusion is necessarily limited. Pontoo, 666

F.3d at 30. If, as the stop progresses, the officer utilizes means that are “too intrusive in

nature or too long in duration,” then the officer’s actions no longer “reasonably relate[] in

scope to the circumstances which justified the interference” and the stop may be

transformed from “a valid Terry stop” into “its invalid counterpart (commonly known as a

de facto arrest).” Id. at 26, 30 (citations and quotation marks omitted); see also Royer, 460

U.S. at 500 (“The scope of the detention must be carefully tailored to its underlying

justification. . . . [A]n investigative detention must be temporary and last no longer than is

necessary to effectuate the purpose of the stop. Similarly, the investigative methods

employed should be the least intrusive means reasonably available to verify or dispel the

officer’s suspicion in a short period of time.”).

       As stated by the First Circuit, “[t]here is no ‘litmus-paper test’ . . . to determine

whether any particular mode of detention amounted to a de facto arrest.” Acosta-Colon,

157 F.3d at 14 (quoting Royer, 460 U.S. at 506). As with reasonable suspicion, courts

                                              8
evaluating the scope of a stop look to the totality of the circumstances and consider a variety

of factors. United States v. Sowers, 136 F.3d 24, 28 (1st Cir. 1998). In practice, this

multifactorial inquiry is commonly reduced to one core consideration: “whether ‘a

reasonable man in the suspect’s position would have understood his situation’ . . . to be

tantamount to being under arrest.” United States v. Zapata, 18 F.3d 971, 975 (1st Cir.

1994) (quoting Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 442 (1984)). However, it is important

to note:

              Where an investigatory stop is justified at its inception, it will
              generally not morph into a de facto arrest as long as “the actions
              undertaken by the officer[s] following the stop were reasonably
              responsive to the circumstances justifying the stop in the first place as
              augmented by information gleaned by the officer[s] during the stop.”

United States v. Chaney, 647 F.3d 401, 409 (1st Cir. 2011) (quoting United States v.

Trueber, 238 F.3d 79, 92 (1st Cir. 2001).

          Easler argues that even if officers could have reasonably suspected him of engaging

in criminal conduct, by handcuffing him and then searching him the officers escalated the

interaction beyond the level of a Terry stop to that of a “de facto arrest” unsupported by

probable cause. 3 Mot. Suppress ¶¶ 10, 11. Therefore, he argues, the search was unlawful

and I must suppress the evidence gathered from his person. Id. ¶ 11. Contrary to Easler’s

assertions, this is not a case where the investigatory stop “mutate[d] into the functional

equivalent of an arrest.” United States v. Lee, 317 F.3d 26, 31 (1st Cir. 2003).



3
    When police subject an individual to a “temporary detention,” that detention, as discussed above, must
    be based upon a “showing equivalent to reasonable suspicion.” Morelli v. Webster, 552 F.3d 12, 19 (1st
    Cir. 2009). However, if the interaction at issue transforms into an arrest or de facto arrest, the government
    must shoulder the “qualitatively different” and more stringent burden of establishing probable cause. Id.
                                                        9
       It is a bedrock principle that “‘[w]hen an officer is justified in believing that the

individual whose suspicious behavior he is investigating at close range is armed and

presently dangerous to the officer or to others,’ he may conduct a limited protective search

for concealed weapons.” Adams, 407 U.S. at 146 (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 24); see also

Romain, 393 F.3d at 71 (“[I]n determining whether a pat-down search is an appropriate

step following a valid Terry stop, the key is whether, under the circumstances, ‘the officer

is justified in believing that the person is armed and dangerous to the officer or others.’”

(quoting United States v. Schiavo, 29 F.3d 6, 8 (1st Cir.1994))). Easler – a suspect who

had reportedly been “acting oddly,” fled his vehicle, was discovered lying on the ground

in a snowy field at night in zero-degree temperatures, and was armed with an exposed

shotgun clearly posed a substantial degree of risk to the officers. The officers’ search of

Easler’s body was eminently appropriate.

       These same circumstances also guide my determination that the officers’ decision

to handcuff Easler was both reasonable and appropriate. While it is true that “the use of

handcuffs, being one of the most recognizable indicia of a traditional arrest, ‘substantially

aggravates the intrusiveness’ of a putative Terry stop,” it is also clear that officers may

handcuff a suspect when “the use of such restraints [is] necessary to carry out the legitimate

purposes of the stop without exposing law enforcement officers, the public, or the suspect

himself to an undue risk of harm.” Acosta-Colon, 157 F.3d at 19; see also Pontoo, 666

F.3d at 30 (“When officer safety is a legitimate concern, a Terry stop appropriately may

involve the application of handcuffs.”). This is the paradigmatic scenario supporting the

application of handcuffs while conducting a Terry stop. Easler roamed away from his truck

                                             10
left atop a snowbank, after requesting transportation because he had to “get out of here.”

He was found in a field of snow on a cold night with a pistol-grip shotgun hanging from a

sling in plain view.           The officers’ actions, although plainly restrictive, were both

proportional and reasonably responsive to the potential danger they faced which did not

transform this Terry stop into a de facto arrest before the officers uncovered the evidence

Easler seeks to suppress. 4

                                             CONCLUSION

          For the foregoing reasons, Defendant’s Motion to Suppress (ECF No. 26) is

DENIED.

          SO ORDERED.

          Dated this 1st day of July, 2019


                                                           /s/ Lance E. Walker
                                                           LANCE E. WALKER
                                                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE




4
    Easler concedes that once the officers searched his person, they had probable cause to arrest him. Mot.
    Suppress ¶ 12. I agree. The officers’ lawful search revealed “enough evidence to warrant an arrest”: a
    second loaded firearm, a drug kit, a clear bag which the officers believed contained methamphetamine, a
    set of handcuffs, and a methamphetamine pipe. See United States v. Quinn, 815 F.2d 153, 161 (1st Cir.
    1987); see also United States v. Rasberry, 882 F.3d 241, 249-50 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 139 S. Ct. 591
    (2018) (“It is common ground that a Terry stop can evolve to a point at which there is probable cause to
    make an arrest.”).
                                                      11
